2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan - Executive Summary (adopted February 2, 2026). Page markers [Page N] are PDF page numbers.

[Page 1]
Ketchikan Gateway Borough
2035 Comprehensive Plan
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Adopted
February
2, 2026
2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 1


[Page 2]
Role of a Comprehensive Plan
A Comprehensive Plan is a guiding policy document, providing a framework for future decisions made by the Borough
Assembly, Planning Commission, and the community. Under Alaska Title 29, second class boroughs like Ketchikan
Gateway Borough are required to adopt a Comprehensive Plan and implement it through zoning ordinances and other
land use regulations.
The plan serves several purposes:
•
•
•
•
•

Establishes a long-term vision for community growth and development.
Guides public policy related to land use, housing, infrastructure, and other services.
Informs regulatory updates, including zoning, subdivision, and capital improvement plans.
Provides a stable, coordinated approach to public and private development.
Lays the groundwork for decisions that are fair, transparent, and aligned with public values.

The plan offers flexibility with strategies and actions that can evolve over time in response to new data and
information, community needs, and opportunities.

What is a comprehensive plan?

What is a zoning code?

A comprehensive plan is a combination of long-term goals and
short-term strategies that guide decisions about land use,
housing, public utilities and facilities, transportation,
economic development, culture, wellness, education, and
more. The plan provides a road map for implementation with
clear priorities and action items. The Future Land Use Map in
the comprehensive plan provides a blueprint that sets intent
for how the community will accommodate change and meet
resident needs through clearly defined future land use
categories and objectives.

Zoning code and the zoning map are local
laws governing how land is used or
developed, where and how buildings are
sited, and other rules related to how a
property functions. Zoning is the tool the
Borough uses to achieve the intent set by
the goals set in the Future Land Use Map
component of the comprehensive plan.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 2


[Page 3]
Community Voices:
Highlights from the Community Survey
The Ketchikan Gateway Borough 2035 Comprehensive Plan Community Survey was open for approximately four
weeks in February and March 2025. There were 470 survey responses, which account for approximately 3.5 percent
of the 2023 borough population. There was also a Youth Survey conducted with Ketchikan High School students and
an Interactive Comment Map that collected feedback on location-based topics. Complete survey results are
available in Appendix C.

Word cloud generated from answers to the question, “In one word or phrase, how would you describe Ketchikan’s
character, people, and/or attributes?” Generated using wordart.com; word size based on frequency of mention.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 3


[Page 4]
Community Survey Highlights
What do you value most
about living in the
Ketchikan Gateway
Borough?

What is most
challenging about living
in the Ketchikan
Gateway Borough?

Top 3 themes:

Top 3 themes:

• Close to nature and
wilderness
• Clean air and water
• Recreational opportunities

• Housing availability and
affordability
• Food costs and availability
• Access to quality health
care

What is your preferred level of
growth* for the Ketchikan Gateway
Borough over the next 10 years?
*Growth is deﬁned as a combination
of increased population and number
of jobs in the borough

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

If you were responsible
for funding community
priorities, which three
priorities would you
fund first?
Top 3 themes:

• Increase supply and
accessibility of affordable
housing
• Advocate for stable K-12
education funding
• Balance the needs of
residents with the economic
benefits of tourism

42%

of participants would like
to see moderate growth.
Industries receiving the
most support for growth
are Healthcare, Marine
Trades, Construction, and
Education.

Page 4


[Page 5]
Our People and Our Economy Highlights
The Background Research and Data Analysis document (available in Appendix B) compiled information and analysis
from a variety of data sources to analyze demographic and economic trends in the Ketchikan Gateway Borough. This
data was important to consider in the development of the Comprehensive Plan.

2023 Population: Ketchikan Gateway Borough: 13,475 | Ketchikan City: 7,803
Like other boroughs and census areas in Southeast Alaska, the population in the Ketchikan
Gateway Borough is projected to decline approximately 20 percent from 2023 to 2050. Nearly 15
percent of the population identifies as Alaska Native/American Indian and nearly 10 percent
identify as Filipino, comprising the two largest non-white racial/ethnicity groups in the Ketchikan
community.
Source: Alaska Department of Labor & Workforce Development and U.S. Census Bureau

Median household income: $86,370 | Poverty rate: 4.2 percent | Unemployment rate: 3.4
percent
Residents of the borough earn more per capita than Alaskan residents, but their median household
income is slightly lower compared to other Alaskan residents due to Ketchikan households having
fewer earners than the statewide average. It also reflects that more Ketchikan residents work in
higher-paying seasonal jobs than the statewide average.. From 2013 to 2024, the borough often
had higher rates of unemployment during the winter than Alaska as a whole and lower rates of
unemployment during the summer, also due to the amount of seasonal jobs. Source: U.S. Census
Bureau

2023-2024 School enrollment (PK-12): 2,095 students
Enrollment peaked in the 2014–2015 school year at 2,474 students. Since then, enrollment has
declined slowly, reaching its lowest in the past 10 years in the 2023–2024 school year. The KGBSD
is forecasting substantial declines in enrollment between the 2023–2024 and 2028–2029 school
years. Source: Ketchikan Gateway School District

KGB residents who fished on commercial permits in 2023: 188
Pounds landed by KGB residents: 34.8 million lbs.
Estimated gross earnings: $22.3 million
The number of permit holders in 2023 is about 7 percent less than 2014. From 2014 to 2023, the
percentage of permit holders who fished decreased from 69 percent to 58 percent. The total
pounds landed in 2014 is slightly below the total pounds landed in 2023. Estimated gross earnings
in 2023 were also similar to those in 2014.
Source: Commercial Fisheries Entry Commission

Ketchikan is the second most visited destination in Alaska, with 47 percent of visitors to
the state making a stop here.
There was an estimated 1.5 million cruise ship passengers to Ketchikan in 2024, remaining about
the same as the number of cruise ship passengers to Ketchikan in 2023..
Source: Alaska Travel Industry Association

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 5


[Page 6]
Our Vision
and Values
Guided by History, Inspired by Community
Rooted in the traditions and stories of those
who came before us, we look forward with
intention. Ketchikan Gateway Borough will
be a place where decisions reflect shared
values, celebrate cultural diversity, and
balance economic growth while respecting
our environment and creating a thriving
community for all.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 6


[Page 7]
Land Use and Environment

Key Themes Guiding the Plan
•
•
•
•
•
•

Strategic growth protects land and serves community needs.
Consistent and modernized code revisions can unlock development goals.
Diverse areas require place-based planning.
Historic preservation strengthens community identity.
Land use decisions reflect community values.
Collaboration catalyzes effective implementation.

Goal A

Goal B

Guide growth through coordinated, predictable,
and place-based land use planning approaches.

Plan for safe and adaptive use of land in the
face of natural hazards and changing
conditions.

Strategies
1. Implement a future land use map that guides future decisions about land use and growth.
2. Update and improve the Borough's zoning and subdivision code to better respond to existing
and future issues and opportunities.
3. Reduce risks from landslides, flooding, erosion, and other natural hazards by improving
maps, updating land use policies, and investing in resilient infrastructure.
4. Promote coordinated area and neighborhood planning to guide future development,
infrastructure investment, and zoning updates in priority locations.
5. Preserve cultural, environmental, and recreational resources through land use planning and
partnerships.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 7


[Page 8]
Future Land Use Map General Categories

The land use categories defined on the map cover areas with different uses, but with similar underlying characteristics. For
example, the “Urban Residential” designation includes multiple housing types that have access to public sewer.

Land Use
Category

Intended Land Uses

Application
Areas

Use Examples

Downtown
Core

High-intensity mixed-use areas focused on infill
and redevelopment in walkable districts with
existing infrastructure.

Expansion of
Central
Commercial
zone

Medical or professional
office, restaurant, grocery
store, mixed-use
commercial buildings,
cultural facilities

Urban
Residential

Residential areas that support a mix of high- and
low-density housing types located near core
services, transit, and infrastructure to promote
efficient land use and walkability.

Residential
areas with
access to sewer
infrastructure

Fourplex, townhome, livework units, group living
facilities, single family
units, corner store, cafe

Rural
Residential

Residential areas outside of core service areas
that may have limits to infrastructure or lot size
minimums and where development patterns are
shaped by access, terrain, and the capacity of
on-site water and wastewater systems.

Residential
areas outside
the City of
Ketchikan
vicinity

Single-family home,
duplex, accessory
dwelling, manufactured
home, cabin, small-scale
farm, home occupation

Rural Mixed
Use

A variety of uses are allowed, including
residential, commercial, and light industrial with
the general goal of preserving the residential
character of surrounding neighborhoods.

Remote areas or
neighborhood
communities
outside of
municipal areas

Single-family home,
cottage industry, lodge,
general store, boat repair,
storage yard

Commercial

Areas intended for retail, service, office, and
automotive uses that support both residents and
visitors, typically located along major corridors or
highway-accessible sites.

Areas near the
downtown core
and some areas
along Tongass
highway

Retail, office, restaurant,
grocery, hotel, gas station,
auto repair shop, school,
community facility

Industrial

Areas reserved for light and heavy industrial uses,
including manufacturing, processing, storage,
marine services, and other activities that require
separation from residential or commercial uses
due to noise, traffic, or operational intensity.

Light Industrial
and Heavy
Industrial zones

Warehouse, processing
plant, freight terminal,
construction yard, salvage
operation, material
storage area

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 8


[Page 9]
Land Use
Category

Intended Land Uses

Application
Areas

Use Examples

Commercial
Waterfront

Waterfront dependent uses that combine light
industrial, recreation, and commercial uses,
balancing working waterfronts with community
spaces. Residential uses are accessory.

Areas along
harbors

Boat harbors, docks,
retail, parks, canneries.

Industrial
Waterfront

Marine related waterfront dependent uses that
are industrial in nature.

Areas west of
A&P, Fuel Dock,
Coast Guard
Docks, Ward
Cove

Freight docks, Ferry
docks, cruise ship docks.

Airport

Lands supporting aviation-related uses,
transportation facilities, and compatible
commercial or industrial activities essential to
regional mobility and freight access.

Airport District
zone

Aviation uses and
accessory uses

Institutional

Sites owned by municipal entities generally
intended for public works purposes.

Ketchikan Creek,
Carlanna Creek

Water treatment facilities
and storage areas, utility
fields

Recreation
and Open
Space

Areas designated for parks, conservation, and
recreation as principal uses, not managed by
State or Federal governments.

Parks, harbors

Playground, sports field,
trailhead, beach access,
picnic area, natural area

Public
Management

State, federal, and other lands with multiple
uses, including but not limited to flood
protection, habitat value, traditional use, cultural
and heritage protection by Tribal governments,
recreation, tourism, and timber extraction.

Tongass
National Forest,
State lands,
State Historic
Preservation
Sites

Uses designated by State
and Federal agencies and
Land Trusts

Unspecified
Future Use

Large, vacant private lands where no specific
future land use pattern has been identified at this
time.

Remote areas
borough-wide

None

Future Land Use Map Overlay Categories

The overlays defined on the map cover areas with base land use designations but identify special provisions in addition to the
base designation.

Category

Description

Application Areas

Area Plan

Areas where further planning efforts may be needed and/or
where additional development regulations may apply.

Downtown, Ward Cove,
Herring Cove, Creek Street,
Hopkins Alley, Settlers Cove,
Gravina Island

Environmental
Constraints

Known areas of environmental constraints, such as steep
slopes and flood areas, to help identify places where more
detailed site analysis may be warranted if areas are to be
developed or improved.

See Land Use and
Environment Appendix.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 9


[Page 10]
Future Land Use Map, Map 1: Area Overview

Wóotsáagháa
X’áayi

Géinaks’

Kichxháan

Detailed area maps of
Ketchikan, North Tongass, and
South Tongass are available in
Appendix A: Land Use and
Environment Background.

Kichxháan Ka

Future Land Use Map
Area Overview

T’èesh Kwáan
Xagu

Chachkw

Prepared by Agnew::Beck, October 2025

Base Designation
Downtown Core

Industrial Waterfront

Urban Residential

Airport

Rural Residential

Institutional

Rural Mixed Use

Recreation and Open Space

Commercial

Public Management

Industrial

Unspecified Future Use

Commercial Waterfront

Area Planning Overlay

What is a Future Land Use Map?
Future land use maps anticipate
development needs and
constraints, identify suitable types
of development, and establish
policies to guide development.
They do not act as regulatory
zoning documents or make
changes to existing code.

This map incorporates information from Haa Léelk’u Has Aani Saax’ú Kudzítee (Saanya & Taant’a Place Names), a community-based project mapping traditional Tlingit placenames and
territories. It is shared here for reference only. For the full map and source context, please visit: https://www.google.com/maps/d/viewer?mid=1CgaYbgGaeojaYXZsImsWfSiW1VUuYKM&ll

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 10


[Page 11]
Transportation

Key Themes Guiding the Plan
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Residents emphasize the need for resilient, hazard-mitigating infrastructure.
Investment in marine transportation supports critical links between communities and
regional economies.
Strengthening airport infrastructure and access supports regional connectivity.
Improvements to mobility during tourist season ensures access for residents.
Multimodal and ADA-accessible transportation systems improve livability.
Scaled and accessible public transit service keeps the community connected.
Improving access to Gravina Island is essential for long-term development.
Transportation access affects food security and cost of living.

Goal A

Goal B

Goal C

Build and maintain a safe,
resilient, and accessible
transportation network.

Strengthen regional and interisland connectivity.

Enable growth and
development through
infrastructure investment.

Strategies
1. Advocate for hazard-resilient transportation infrastructure.
2. Strengthen marine and inter-island connectivity.
3. Continue to improve airport access and modernize infrastructure.
4. Expand public transit reach and efficiency.
5. Address accessibility and traffic congestion by designing safer, inclusive streets that serve
residents of all ages and abilities.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 11


[Page 12]
Public Facilities and Services

Key Themes Guiding the Plan
•
•
•
•
•

Expanded utility infrastructure can unlock development opportunities and stabilize
neighborhoods.
Wastewater planning efforts are needed to modernize existing systems and expand
capacity.
Ongoing emergency management efforts are improving coordination and readiness.
Investments in public facilities and harbors support transportation and commerce.
New and diversified waste management solutions are in demand.

Goal A

Goal B

Goal C

Enable sustainable growth
through strategic utility and
infrastructure investment.

Enhance regional connectivity
and access through
investment in harbors, ports,
and public facilities.

Maintain, improve, and
modernize public facilities
and infrastructure to support
access, equity, and long-term
community use.

Strategies
1. Support coordinated utility infrastructure expansion to enable new housing development.
2. Address challenges to wastewater capacity.
3. Modernize core infrastructure to improve resilience.
4. Enhance and maintain port and harbor infrastructure to support safe transportation,
economic development, and community access.
5. Improve connectivity and development readiness on Gravina Island.
6. Equip emergency and public safety services to meet evolving community needs.
7. Promote cleaner communities through education, outreach, and responsible solid waste
management.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 12


[Page 13]
Housing

Key Themes Guiding the Plan
•
•
•
•
•

Improving housing affordability and availability are key to unlocking economic growth.
Workforce housing and options beyond single family homes are in high demand.
Accessible housing enables community stability for residents of all ages and abilities.
Opportunities exist for innovative partnerships and housing strategies.
More information is needed about the effects of short-term rentals on housing supply.

Goal A

Goal B

Goal C

Increase the supply and
diversity of housing to meet
current and future needs.

To support the development
and preservation of housing
options that are affordable
and accessible to the needs
of current and future Borough
residents.

Foster collaboration and
innovation to expand housing
solutions.

Strategies
1. Accelerate housing development through policies.
2. Partner with employers on workforce housing solutions.
3. Improve housing accessibility and safety through rehabilitation and infill development.
4. Leverage local partnerships and new models to deliver diverse housing solutions.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 13


[Page 14]
Economic Development

Key Themes Guiding the Plan
•
•
•
•
•
•

Economic diversification is necessary for Ketchikan’s long-term stability.
Emerging workforce development programs are attempting to address skills gaps.
Sustainable tourism strategies offer solutions that contribute to Ketchikan’s fiscal health
and improve year-round livability.
Commercial fishing remains core to Ketchikan’s identity.
Strengthening local food systems can improve food security and economic resilience.
Infrastructure improvements can spur growth and increase livability.

Goal A

Goal B

Goal C

Diversify and strengthen the
local, year-round economy.

To advance economic
development efforts that are
responsive to community
values, support quality of life,
and encourage community
engagement.

Invest in people and
infrastructure to build and
retain a skilled, inclusive, and
future-ready workforce.

Strategies
1. Diversify the local economy to expand beyond tourism and address cost of living burdens.
2. Align tourism activities and management with community values and residents’ quality of
life.
3. Build a skilled and resilient local workforce.
4. Strengthen the commercial fishing and mariculture economies.
5. Strengthen growth of local food systems to expand food security and help address high living
costs.
6. Continue support for local nonprofit, arts, community services, and cultural activities and
initiatives.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 14


[Page 15]
Health and Wellness

Key Themes Guiding the Plan
•
•
•

Affordability of basic needs contributes to community health and well-being.
Community connectivity programs support mental health.
Indoor recreation and activities support physical and mental health.

Goal A

Goal B

Goal C

Promote community wellbeing by improving access to
health, housing, and support
services.

Support prevention, recovery,
and community resilience
through coordinated
behavioral health and
substance misuse response.

Support planning and
investment decisions that
improve access to healthy
environments, recreational
amenities, and active
transportation options across
the borough.

Strategies
1. Consider access to housing, childcare, food, and health care as essential components of
community health.
2. Promote physical and mental wellness across generations by strengthening support in
schools, homes, and shared community spaces.
3. Develop inclusive indoor recreation and gathering spaces.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 15


[Page 16]
Education and Culture

Key Themes Guiding the Plan
•
•
•

A strong, supported public education system builds stable communities.
Cultural identity and belonging are central to community well-being.
Arts, history, and cultural expression strengthen community identity and quality of life.

Goal A

Goal B

Goal C

Strengthen education
systems through sustained
investment, support, and
youth engagement.

Celebrate cultural identity
and promote a connected,
inclusive, and welcoming
community.

Support access to arts, career
technical training, and
cultural opportunities, for the
economic benefit of borough
residents.

Strategies
1. Ensure capital, planning, and advocacy efforts reflect desire for stable, high-quality K–12
education.
2. Empower youth to participate in local government and shape the future of their community.
3. Strengthen collaboration between the Borough, Tribes, Filipino community, and other
cultural connections and service providers to support culturally rooted wellness,
awareness, and education.
4. Support local arts and cultural programming as important components of our community.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 16


[Page 17]
Governance

Key Themes Guiding the Plan
•
•
•
•

Strong financial management practices provide a foundation for stability.
Tourism-driven revenues create both opportunity and risk.
Infrastructure and service demands are growing.
External funding and partnerships are critical for fiscal resilience.

Goal A

Goal B

Goal C

Maintain a stable and resilient
fiscal foundation.

Build transparent, inclusive,
and collaborative governance.

Strengthen government
capacity.

Strategies
1. Enhance government transparency and community engagement.
2. Strengthen intergovernmental collaboration
3. Strive for fiscal resilience through long-range planning.
4. Foster government workforce stability and capacity.
5. Promote long-term fiscal stability through equitable tax policy and strategic investment.

2035 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan
Executive Summary

Page 17


