KETCHIKAN GATEWAY BOROUGH CODE - TITLE 18, PLANNING AND ZONING

Full text of KGBC Title 18, chapters 18.10 through 18.90.
Title 18 was repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 2022 (Exh. A), effective August 8, 2023.
Per-section amendment history notes were removed for length.

Verify current text at https://ketchikangateway.borough.codes/KGBC/18 before citing in a motion.

CHAPTER 18.10 Definitions

18.10.010 General interpretation (as used in this title).

(a) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
(b) The singular numbers include the plural.
(c) The word “person” includes a corporation as well as an individual.
(d) The word “lot” includes the word “plot” or “parcel.”
(e) The term “shall” is always mandatory.
(f) The word “used” or “occupied,” as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words “intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied.”


18.10.020 “A” definitions.

“Accessory building” means a detached building, the use of which is appropriate, subordinate and customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land and which is located on the same lot as the main building or use. An accessory building shall be considered to be a part of the main building when joined to the main building by a common wall or breezeway.
Accessory Use. See subsection (1) of “use” definition in KGBC 18.10.220.
“Aircraft maintenance and repair” means commercial operations providing service beyond routine cleaning and minor repair of aircraft, or any provision of services repairing, overhauling, rebuilding or maintaining aircraft or aircraft engines under conditions which require operation of aircraft engines not associated with movement of the aircraft from one location to another.
“Airport reserve” means those certain properties located within the airport development zone identified within the map below.
Alley. See subsection (1) of “street” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.
“Alteration” means any change, addition or modification in the construction, location or use classification.
“Antenna” means any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting, receiving, transmitting or radiating electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes, satellite dishes, and omnidirectional antennas, such as whip antennas.
Apartment House. See “Dwelling, multiple-family” in KGBC 18.10.050.
“Appurtenance” means an accessory, auxiliary or support structure that is attached to another structure or to the property (examples are: decks to houses; carports to garages; and docks to uplands).
“Area, building” means the total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of steps.
Arterial Street. See subsection (2) of “street” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.
“As-built survey” means a drawing prepared after the completion of construction in such a manner as to accurately identify and depict the location of all on-site improvements, including but not limited to structures, and showing distances between structures and lot lines, which is stamped by a surveyor licensed by the State of Alaska.
“Automobile wrecking” means the dismantling of used motor vehicles or trailers or the storage or sale of parts from dismantled or partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles.
A-Weighted Sound Level. See subsection (1) of “sound level” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.


18.10.030 “B” definitions.

“Bed and breakfast” means a use that is subordinate to the principal use of a single-family dwelling unit in which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for payment.
“Boarding house” means a building other than a hotel where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation for three or more persons, on other than a day-to-day basis and which is not open to transient guests.
“Buffer” means an area of land which is either left undisturbed with native vegetation or is planted and maintained in shrubs, bushes, trees, and/or other landscaping material, which will obscure visibility from adjoining properties and within which no structure is permitted except a fence.
“Building” means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
“Building code” means the building code and/or other building regulations applicable in the city and/or borough.
“Building, existing” means a building erected prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title or one for which a zoning permit has been issued.
“Building, nonconforming” means any building or structure or any portion thereof lawfully existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter became effective, which was designed, erected or structurally altered for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located or a building or structure that does not conform to all the height and area regulations of the zone in which it is located.
“Building, principal or main” means a building in which is conducted the principal or main use of the lot on which said building is situated. Attached garages, porches and carports shall be considered to be part of the principal building.


18.10.040 “C” definitions.

“Caretaker’s quarters” means an accessory dwelling to be used as a primary residence on the premises as an accessory to a permitted nonresidential use and occupied by a person employed on the premises to monitor operations and provide interventions as needed around the clock.
Collector Street. See subsection (3) of “street” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.
“Co-location” means the provisions of multiple antennas or more than one commercial wireless communication service provider or government entity on a single tower or structure.
Commercial District Transient Use. See subsection (1) of “transient use” definition in KGBC 18.10.210.
“Commercial shopping center” means a structure designed for use for a store or stores offering frequently needed goods and services for retail sale, which either (1) contains 50,000 or more square feet of gross floor area, or (2) applying the standards in the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), would be anticipated to generate a number of vehicle trips per day equal to or greater than the following:
(1) For developments with access off of an arterial street: 3,000 trips.
(2) For developments with access off of a collector street: 2,000 trips.
(3) For developments with access off of a local street: 600 trips.
(4) For developments with access off of a lane: 150 trips.
(5) For developments with access off of a place: 50 trips.
“Commercially marketable natural resources” includes rock and minerals, timber, topsoil, and any other naturally occurring material for which a market demand exists or is reasonably expected to exist.
“Commission” means the Ketchikan Gateway Borough planning commission.
“Common carrier” means any carrier required by law to convey passengers or freight without refusal if the approved fare or charge is paid in contrast to private or contract carrier.
Common Wall. See subsection (1) of “dwelling, townhouse” definition in KGBC 18.10.050.
“Community character” means those indices of the composite nature of an area which are described as keeping with the general theme or concept of a traditional design and/or construction consistent with the desires of the community. Examples of consistency would be facades and exteriors constructed with materials found to be desirable to those within boundaries of a defined area such as Ketchikan Gateway Borough.
“Cottage industry” means a small-scale home-based business involving the on-site manufacture and/or sale of goods or services or the retailing, wholesaling, and renting of real or personal property provided such activities are permitted uses and are not, in the determination of the planning commission, detrimental to surrounding properties. Cottage industries are intended to provide economic support for households located in the outlying portions of the borough not served by the roaded system. Cottage industries are subordinate to the principal residential use of property and, in general, are a more intensive use of property than a home occupation and a less intense use of property than permitted in commercial and industrial zones.
“Coverage” means that percentage of the total lot area covered by principal and accessory buildings.
[Ord. No. 2082, §1, 8-18-25; Ord. No. 2048, §1, 9-16-24; Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.10.050 “D” definitions.

“Day care, commercial” means a facility licensed by the state providing care for hire of five or more children who are unrelated to the caregiver (“relative” means an individual who is related to another by marriage, blood relationship, or court decree; “relative” includes a parent, child, grandparent, great grandparent, brother, sister, stepparent, stepsister, stepbrother, aunt, uncle, great-aunt, great-uncle or step-grandparent), primarily during the daytime hours but who do not stay overnight; may include instruction.
“Day care for hire, residential” means any home regularly used or maintained to provide care for hire of four or fewer children (up to age 12), not counting any children who are related to the caregiver (“relative” means an individual who is related to another by marriage, blood relationship, or court decree; “relative” includes a parent, child, grandparent, great grandparent, brother, sister, stepparent, stepsister, stepbrother, aunt, uncle, great-aunt, great-uncle or step-grandparent) and shall meet all requirements for home occupations. This definition does not apply to babysitting or occasional day care for hire that is less than 20 days in a three-month period.
Decibel (dB). See subsection (2) of “sound level” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.
“Density” means the number of dwelling units for a gross area of land (acres) or lot, typically associated with a development area plan used in the creation of a master development plan for a planned unit development zone.
“Design standards” means a set of regulatory guides addressing characteristics such as materials, quality, general appearance, architectural motif, historical character, color schemes and the like which are applied to a structure constructed on a parcel or parcels of real property to which design standards apply.
“Development area” means a PUD subsection that prescribes a specific set of land uses that are subject to specific development requirements.
“Dormitory” means a building or part of a structure with four or more sleeping rooms, one common kitchen, and may include some common gathering rooms, that are designed or intended to be used principally for sleeping accommodations for more than four persons such as employees or students and is not open to transient guests.
“Dwelling” means a building or any portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy including one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, but not including any other building wherein human beings may be housed.
“Dwelling, four-family” means a building containing four individual dwellings. Detached accessory dwelling units are not included in this definition. Four-family dwellings shall be either in a side-by-side or in an over-under (stacked) configuration. Side-by-side dwelling units shall share a common wall or be connected by a common roof. The shared walls or roof shall not be those of a breezeway, or other accessory structure, but may include a carport or garage. Each dwelling unit must have direct access to the outside or to a common wall. Each dwelling unit is intended to be occupied by one family.
“Dwelling, multiple-family” means any building located on a single lot and containing five or more dwelling units.
“Dwelling, one-family” means any detached building containing only one dwelling unit.
“Dwelling, townhouse” means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit, occupying space from the ground to the roof and not lying vertically under or over adjacent units, and attached to a series of two or more, but not exceeding seven, additional similar dwelling units, each of which is located on a separate lot, and each of which shares a common wall, located on a side lot line, with another similar dwelling unit.
(1) “Common wall” means a wall with no openings located along a side lot line and forming the division between two independent but attached dwelling units located on adjoining lots. A garage or carport wall may form the common wall, provided the garage or carport is attached to a dwelling unit.
(2) “End lot” means a lot in a townhouse development which has a common wall located on only one of its two side lot lines.
“Dwelling, triplex” means a building containing three individual dwellings. Detached accessory dwelling units are not included in this definition. Triplex dwellings shall be either in a side-by-side or in an over-under (stacked) configuration. Side-by-side dwelling units shall share a common wall or be connected by a common roof. The shared walls or roof shall not be those of a breezeway, or other accessory structure, but may include a carport or garage. Each dwelling unit must have direct access to the outside or to a common wall. Each dwelling unit is intended to be occupied by one family.
“Dwelling, twinhouse” means a building, located on a separate lot, designated exclusively for occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit, which is attached by a common wall located on a side lot line to a similar building on an adjacent lot containing one dwelling unit.
(1) “Common wall” means a wall with no openings located along a side lot line and forming the division between two independent but attached dwelling units located on adjoining lots. A garage or carport wall may form the common wall, provided the garage or carport is attached to a dwelling unit.
“Dwelling, two-family” means any building located on a single lot and containing only two dwelling units. Two-family dwelling units (duplexes) shall be either in a side-by-side or in an over-under (stacked) configuration. Side-by-side dwelling units shall share a common wall or be connected by a common roof. The shared walls or roof shall not be those of a breezeway, or other accessory structure, but may include a carport or garage.
“Dwelling unit” means either a single room or two or more connected rooms used exclusively as a single unit and intended for occupancy for no less than 30 consecutive days or more by one family, and providing complete, independent living facilities (which at a minimum includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation which are accessed independently). This term does not include hotel or motel rooms, extended stay lodging facilities, boarding and lodging rooms, nursing home rooms, or assisted living units.


18.10.060 “E” definitions.

End Lot. See subsection (2) of “dwelling, townhouse” definition in KGBC 18.10.050.
“Essential service” means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service of such public utilities or borough departments or commissions or for the public health or safety or general welfare.


18.10.070 “F” definitions.

“Family” means any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
“Fence height” means the vertical distance between the ground directly under the fence and the highest point of the fence.
“Float plane facilities” means a terminal for a commercial enterprise providing either regularly scheduled flights for passengers and freight or unscheduled charter air transportation, sightseeing, recreational flights. Facilities include docks, hangars, ramps, fueling facilities for aircraft, and terminal facilities for passengers. Docks or related structures used for the routine delivery of freight or passengers ancillary to a remote lodge, cabin, or other recreational or commercial principal use are not considered float plane facilities.
“Flood management area” means those areas designated and depicted as “special flood hazard areas” and “other flood areas” on the official flood insurance rate map (FIRM) of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough and the cities of Saxman and Ketchikan, Alaska, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which flood insurance rate map, and the flood insurance study, are on file in the office of the borough clerk and in the borough department of planning and community development, and are available for public inspection and copying and are incorporated herein by reference thereto.
“Floodway” means the channel of watercourse and those portions of adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the main body of water within the flood management area, both within the city of Ketchikan and other areas of the borough.
“Floor area” means the total of each floor of a building within the surrounding outer walls but excluding vent shafts, courts, stairways and elevators.
“Floor, ground” means the floor of a building at or nearest the adjacent street, and which is accessible directly from a front yard. On commercially zoned properties with multiple front yards on sloping sites with street entrances at more than one level, each floor accessible at street level shall be considered a ground floor.
“Front building line” means a line parallel to the front lot line of the lot on which a building is located, that is drawn through the point or vertical face of the building at grade level which is located nearest to the front lot line.
“Frontage” means the lot width measured along the property line adjacent to the street right-of-way.
“Fuel storage and distribution facility” means an area where flammable or combustible liquids are received by tank vessel, pipeline, tank car, or tank vehicle and are stored or blended in bulk for the purpose of distributing such liquids by tank vessel, pipeline, tank car, tank vehicle, portable tank, or container.


18.10.080 “G” definitions.

“Garage, private” means an accessory building or any portion of a main building used in connection with residential purposes for the storage of passenger motor vehicles.
“Garden, hobby” means a residential garden where excess crops are sold off site. The sale of crops is conducted in such a way that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence.
“Garden, residential” means an area accessory to a residence used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, flowers, ornamental plants and the like, and where the crops are used for consumption by the occupants of the residence.
“Garden stand” means a structure or area accessory to a hobby garden that is used for the on-site sale of excess crops from a hobby garden for more than five days within a 60-day period.
“Grade” means the lowest point of elevation of the adjoining sidewalk, paving or unfinished ground surface within the area between the building and the property line, or, when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.
“Gross floor area” means the total of each floor of a building within the surrounding outer walls but excluding vent shafts and courts, stairways and elevators.
“Guest room” means any room in a hotel, dormitory, boarding or lodging house used and maintained to provide sleeping accommodations for not more than two persons.


18.10.090 “H” definitions.

Highway. See subsection (4) of “street” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.
“Home occupation” means an accessory use of a service character customarily conducted within a dwelling by the residents which does not involve the conduct of trade on the premises.
“Hostel” means a building or part of a building used for temporary accommodations that are open to the public for transient guests and may include a common kitchen, living space, and bunkrooms.
“Hotel” means any building or group of buildings in which there are guest rooms used, designed or intended to be used for the purpose of offering to the general public lodging on a day-to-day basis.
“Household pet” means dogs, cats, birds and other animals which are customarily kept inside a house.


18.10.100 “I” definitions.

“Indoor commercial recreational facility” means a facility which provides space for activities such as bingo halls, theaters, dances or other recreation activities which may attract large numbers of patrons at a single time.
Industrial District Transient Use. See subsection (2) of “transient use” definition in KGBC 18.10.210.


18.10.110 “J” definitions.

“Junked vehicle” means any abandoned, wrecked or inoperable vehicle.
“Junkyard” means any space used for the storage or abandonment of junk or waste material including scrap metals or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery or any parts thereof.


18.10.120 “K” definitions.

“Kennel, boarding” means any lot or premises on which more than six household pets are kept for compensation.
“Kennel, residential” means any lot or premises on which not more than six household pets are kept for compensation.


18.10.130 “L” definitions.

Lane. See subsection (5) of “street” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.
“Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or structure to be used for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
Local Street. See subsection (6) of “street” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.
“Lodge” means a building or group of buildings in which guest rooms are used for the purpose of offering lodging to the general public and support recreational uses such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, boating, or fish processing.
“Lot” means a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a principal use and having frontage on, or access to, a public street.
“Lot, corner” means a lot situated at the junction of, and bordering on, two intersecting streets. A corner lot shall be considered to have two front yards.
“Lot depth” means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines.
“Lot line, front (corner lot)” means the lines separating the lot from the street.
“Lot line, front (interior lot)” means a line separating the lot from the street.
“Lot line, rear” means the line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line, and in the case of an irregular triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line not less than 10 feet in length, within a lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
“Lot line, side” means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
“Lot width” means the average horizontal distance separating the side lot lines of a lot and at right angles to its depth.
[Ord. No. 2048, §4, 9-16-24; Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.10.140 “M” definitions.

“Manufactured home” means a single-family dwelling intended to be transported once but then affixed to a permanent foundation of either posts or blocks with connections to sewer, water, or other utilities in accordance with the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act.
“Marijuana” has the same meaning as contained in AS 17.38.900.
“Marijuana cultivation facility” has the same meaning as contained in AS 17.38.900.
“Marijuana establishment” means any “marijuana cultivation facility”; a “marijuana cultivation facility, limited”; a “marijuana testing facility”; a “marijuana product manufacturing facility”; a “marijuana concentrate manufacturing facility”; or a “marijuana retail store.”
“Marijuana product manufacturing facility” has the same meaning as contained in AS 17.38.900.
“Marijuana products” has the same meaning as contained in AS 17.38.900.
“Marijuana retail store” has the same meaning as “retail marijuana store” contained in AS 17.38.900.
“Marijuana testing facility” has the same meaning as contained in AS 17.38.900.
“Master development plan” means a combination of map(s) and written documents providing both a graphical and narrative description of the PUD. The map is used to show the boundaries of the PUD and any development areas within the PUD and will take a form similar to a plat. The narrative section is used to describe development parameters such as permitted and unpermitted uses if the use is allowed as a principal, accessory, or conditional use, and the development requirements.
“Maximum building height” means the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof, as illustrated within this section, whichever is the greater height. The reference datum shall be selected by either subsection (1), (2), (3), or (4) of this definition as applicable:
(1) The elevation of the highest point on an adjoining sidewalk, paving, or finished grade within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building, when such point on the sidewalk, paving, or finished ground surface is not more than 10 feet above the lowest grade; or
(2) An elevation 10 feet above the lowest grade when the sidewalk, paving, or finished ground surface described in subsection (1) of this definition is more than 10 feet above the lowest grade.
(3) The maximum building height of a stepped or terraced building shall not be greater than the maximum allowable height of the highest segment of such building. The height of each segment shall be computed separately according to the procedures set forth in subsection (1), (2) or (4) of this definition, as applicable, and the maximum height of any one segment shall not exceed the height allowed under subsections (1), (2) and (4) of this definition. Terraced or stepped buildings may only be constructed on slopes of 20 degrees or greater.
(4) Notwithstanding subsection (1) or (2) of this definition, the reference datum for establishing the maximum height of a building that occupies a site with an average slope of 50 degrees or greater, measured from the upslope lot line to the downslope lot line, and where the only access to the lot from a public right-of-way is provided on the upslope side of the lot, shall be the highest point on an adjoining sidewalk, paving, or finished grade located within five feet horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building on the upslope side of the building.
(5) Exceptions. The methods of measurement provided for in this definition and the height limitations set forth in this title shall not apply to church spires, belfries, fire and hose towers, chimneys, flagpoles, ventilators, elevator housings, masts, antennas, and other similar structures (except satellite dishes) that are a part of or directly affixed to a building. Cupolas higher than the height limitations set forth in this title may be allowed if approved by the planning commission when they are determined to be compatible with adjacent structures and uses and do not substantially interfere with views from adjacent properties.
“Maximum structure height” means except for buildings and structures that are a part of or directly affixed to a building as provided for and described in the definition of “maximum building height,” the “maximum structure height” is the vertical distance from the highest lot elevation abutting the structure to the highest point of the structure.
“Mobile building” means a single modular building designed to be transported on its own wheels and chassis.
“Mobile building park” means a parcel of land and related structures and facilities used to locate more than two mobile buildings for long-term residential occupation.
“Mobile food vendor” means a mobile building, vehicle, or combination thereof, used to sell ready-to-eat food directly to consumers.
“Mobile home” means a structure that is transportable in one or more sections and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, which was built to standards other than the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act.
“Motel” means a group of one or more detached or semidetached buildings containing two or more individual dwelling units and/or guest rooms designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with a garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, including groups designated as auto courts, motor lodges or tourist courts.
“Multifamily group housing development” means a residential development where four or more families live in one or more buildings designed for human habitation, but not meeting the definition of a dwelling unit because certain elements are missing. The missing elements, such as cooking or bathing, are provided in a common area that is shared among the residents.


18.10.150 “N” definitions.

“Natural resource extraction” means the extraction of commercially marketable natural resources for sale or trade.
“Natural resource processing” means activities by which extracted natural resources are refined to create a marketable product. In the case of rock, processing includes crushing, screening, and washing. Processing of timber includes trimming branches, bucking to length, and operations typically found in a sawmill. This does not include cutting nonmarketable timber into firewood, or processing other natural resources to be used for development on the property they came from.
Nonconforming Building. See “Building, nonconforming” in KGBC 18.10.030.


18.10.160 “O” definitions.

“Official zoning map” means the digital zoning map of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, together with all amendments to the zoning map subsequently adopted.
“Open storage” means the unenclosed storage of property including but not limited to: appliances, equipment, gear machinery, material supplies, provisions, tools, goods and portions thereof for a period exceeding 60 days. This definition does not include the display of merchandise associated with a bona fide retail business. “Unenclosed,” for the purposes of this definition, shall mean located outside a fully enclosed building.
“Overlay district” means an area identified by boundaries determined by landmarks, streets, or other recognizable monument within which additional provisions of development are required.


18.10.170 “P” definitions.

“Person” means a natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also including a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, trust or other legal entity, including the federal government, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
Place. See subsection (7) of “street” definition in KGBC 18.10.200.
“Planned unit development (PUD)” means a development guided by a master development plan consisting of an established list of uses and standards by development area. PUDs are approved as part of a rezone process to the planned unit development zone and identified on the zoning map as “PUD” followed by the applicable ordinance number (example: PUD 5557).
“Preschool” means any home or institution used to provide day care for hire with educational services for children ages three to five years, not yet reaching the age for enrollment in kindergarten.
Principal Use. See subsection (2) of “use” definition in KGBC 18.10.220.


18.10.180 “Q” definitions.

Reserved


18.10.190 “R” definitions.

“Recreation or youth center” means a building, structure, athletic playing field or playground that is:
(1) Run or created by a municipality or the state to provide athletic, recreational, or leisure activities for minors; or
(2) Operated by a public or private organization licensed by the State to provide shelter, training, or guidance for minors.
“Recreational vehicle or travel trailer” means a portable dwelling designed and used for short-term occupation as a residence without a foundation. The term “travel trailer” includes, but is not limited to, motor homes, pickup campers and tent trailers. When used for long-term occupation, such dwelling shall be treated as a mobile building.
“Recreational vehicle or travel trailer park” means a parcel of land and related structures and facilities used for short-term occupation by persons with travel trailers.
“Residential” means activity involving the permanent occupation of a building for the purposes of living for a period greater than 30 days.


18.10.200 “S” definitions.

“School grounds” means a building, structure, athletic playing field, playground, parking area, or land contained within the real property boundary line of a public or private preschool, elementary, or secondary school.
“Service station” means any building, structure, premises or other space used primarily for the retail sale and dispensing of motor fuels, tires, batteries and other accessories; the installation and servicing of such lubricants, tires, batteries and other accessories; and such other services which do not customarily or usually require the services of a qualified automotive mechanic.
Setback. See “Yard” in KGBC 18.10.260.
“Shooting facility” means a building, area, or combination thereof in or upon which projectiles are propelled by mechanical or chemical means at targets for sport, practice, testing, or training purposes on a commercial basis. The following terms are directly associated with shooting facilities:
(1) Indoor shooting facilities are located in fully enclosed buildings within which all shooting activities occur.
(2) Outdoor shooting facilities are located wholly or partially outside of a building. Facilities where the operator, target, or any space between the two that is not located within a fully enclosed building shall be considered an outdoor facility.
(3) Shooting facilities include: archery range, gun range, rifle range, handgun/pistol range, skeet/trap range, live fire shoot houses. Hunting areas are not considered shooting facilities.
“Short-term rentals” means a dwelling unit that is advertised or otherwise made available to transients in exchange for good and valuable consideration. The renter does not reside in any part of the dwelling during the transient’s stay.
“Sight-obscuring enclosure” means a method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by a board or chain-link fence with slats, wall or berm, or by densely planted vegetation that is at least eight feet in height.
“Sign” means any words, lights, letters, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, trade names or trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business or a commodity or product, which are visible from any public area and used to attract attention.
“Sign, abandoned” means any sign or sign structure identifying a use or activity that has ceased to occupy the site for a period greater than nine months.
Sign Area. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning regulation and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
“Sign, freestanding” means any sign that is permanently affixed in or upon the ground, supported by one or more structural members, with air space between the ground and the sign face.
“Sign, hanging” means any sign hanging under a canopy or marquee mounted perpendicular to a store frontage typically over a public right-of-way and designed to be viewed by pedestrians from the sidewalk.
“Sign, monument” means a freestanding sign that is supported by a structural base and does not have an air gap of more than 12 inches between the top of the structural base and the bottom of the sign face.
“Sign, permanent” means any sign built out of permanent, rigid materials, advertising the name of a business, category, location, type of product, or service provided. Nonrigid materials stretched taut over a rigid frame shall be considered permanent signs.
“Sign, projecting” means any sign that protrudes from or is mounted perpendicularly to any flat surface on a building, including awning signs but not including hanging signs or signs mounted under a canopy or marquee.
“Sign, roof” means a sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof, or over the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, and supported by or attached to said roof, or any sign that uses the roof for support.
“Sign, temporary” means any banner, pennant, valance, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, vinyl, plastic, or other nonpermanent material, without frames, designed to be displayed for a short period of time. This term shall also include any portable sign or portable sign display and any sign or sign display on a truck or motor vehicle that has not moved upon a public street for more than 24 hours.
“Sign, wall” means a sign applied to or mounted flush to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface which does not project more than six inches from the outside wall of such a building or structure. The total individual lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign unless the text groupings are separated by more than 10 feet of blank space.
“Sign, window” means any sign painted on, placed in, or affixed to any window exclusive of merchandise on display which is intended to be seen from the exterior.
“Site development” means extraction, but not processing, of commercially marketable natural resources for the stated purpose of preparing land for improvements such as buildings, structures, roads, driveways, parking areas, and the like.
“Site development plan” means a combination of maps, drawings, and narrative descriptions that provide the zoning official or planning commission with sufficient information to determine the impact natural resource extraction or site development will have on the surrounding neighborhood and to identify conditions reasonably designed to permit the desired development while mitigating adverse impacts on other properties in the area.
“Small scale food processing” means food and seafood processing operations which are exempt from the requirements of Corps of Engineers NPDES general permits. Seafood processing operations must submit a seafood processing permit application to ADEC. All food processing operations must operate in compliance with ADEC regulations.
“Sound level” means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
(1) “A-weighted sound level” means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
(2) “Decibel (dB)” means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
(3) “Sound level meter” means a sound level measuring device, either Type I or Type II as defined by American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereof).
“Street” means a public right-of-way used as a thoroughfare and which is designed and intended to provide the primary means of access to property abutting thereon. The following terms are directly associated with streets:
(1) “Alley” means a public way designed and intended to provide only a secondary means of access to any property abutting thereon.
(2) “Arterial street” means a street with usual average daily traffic over 3,000 trips per day, also called a highway.
(3) “Collector street” means a street with usual average daily traffic of 1,000 to 3,000 trips per day.
(4) Highway. See “Arterial street,” subsection (2) of this definition.
(5) “Lane” means a street with usual average daily traffic of 75 to 200 trips per day.
(6) “Local street” means a street with usual average daily traffic of 200 to 1,000 trips per day, also called a subcollector.
(7) “Place” means a street with usual average daily traffic of zero to 100 trips per day, usually a dead-end street.
(8) “State highway” means a right-of-way classified by the State as a primary, secondary A or secondary B highway.
(9) “Street frontage, linear” means the linear width measured parallel to the street frontage of the heated and enclosed structure upon a premises, not including outbuildings or appurtenant structures, unless said structures have no street frontage, in which case the street frontage shall be the structure’s side width of principal entrance. For multi-tenant buildings, street frontage shall be to the exterior edge of the area of leased space for each tenant. Sides of a building with adjacent parking lots, public sidewalks, or marine access shall be considered street frontage.
(10) “Street line” means the line of demarcation between a street and the lot or land abutting thereon.
(11) Subcollector. See “Local street.”
“Structure” means that which is built or constructed, a building of any kind, composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.


18.10.210 “T” definitions.

“Telecommunication” means the technology which enables information to be exchanged through the transmission of voice, video, or data signals by means of electrical or electromagnetic systems.
“Telecommunication tower” means any structure that is designed and constructed for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar communications purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, wireless communication towers, and alternative tower structures and the like. The term includes the structure and support thereto.
“Telecommunications facilities” means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications a person seeks to locate or have installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure.
“Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of not more than 30 consecutive calendar days, counting portions of days as full days; provided, however, the day a transient checks out shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day. Any person who in fact exercises occupancy or in fact is entitled to occupancy for a period of more than 30 consecutive days shall be deemed not to have been a transient from the date of commencement of such consecutive period for days of occupancy or entitlement to occupancy.
“Transient use” means either a commercial or industrial transient use as found in a motel or hotel, and further defined as:
(1) “Commercial district transient use” means, in the central and general commercial districts, a commercial enterprise for the purpose of providing lodging on a daily basis, room(s) in a building with two or more units. Transient units are not owner occupied. Transient uses may be permitted for tenancy longer than 30 consecutive days pursuant to the residential use requirements of each district.
(2) “Industrial district transient use” means, in the light and heavy industrial districts, a commercial enterprise for the purpose of providing lodging on a daily basis, room(s) in a building with two or more units. Transient units are not owner occupied. Transient uses are not permitted for tenancy longer than 30 consecutive days; residential uses are not permitted in the industrial districts.
Travel Trailer. See “Recreational vehicle or travel trailer” definition in KGBC 18.10.190.
Travel Trailer Park. See “Recreational vehicle or travel trailer park” definition in KGBC 18.10.190.


18.10.220 “U” definitions.

“Usable yard area” means the minimum amount of square feet specified as “usable yard area” in a particular zone, which area shall comply with all of the following design criteria:
(1) Each dimension of the area allocated as usable yard area, at ground level, shall be not less than 10 lineal feet;
(2) Length-to-width ratio shall not exceed two-to-one;
(3) Maximum slope of surface shall be five percent;
(4) Drainage shall be so designed and provided that there will be no standing water;
(5) All surfaces shall be of grass, sand, asphalt, wood, bark, or any combination thereof;
(6) Adequate lighting shall be provided;
(7) Planters, flower beds or permanently installed lawn furniture shall not be included in the calculation of usable yard area;
(8) Usable yard area calculations may not include any required setback, parking or walkway, and may not be located under any unguttered roof overhang, nor closer than five feet to a required window or a door opening;
(9) Fifty percent of the usable yard area requirement may be satisfied through the use of balconies or roofs.
“Use” means the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained.
(1) “Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land, building or structure and located on the same lot or parcel of land.
(2) “Principal use” means the major or predominant use of a lot or parcel of land.


18.10.230 “V” definitions.

Reserved.


18.10.240 “W” definitions.

“Watchman’s quarters” means a dwelling unit to be used as a primary residence as an accessory to a permitted nonresidential use and occupied only by a person employed on the premises.


18.10.250 “X” definitions.

Reserved.


18.10.260 “Y” definitions.

“Yard” means an unoccupied space, unobstructed excepting eaves or overhangs of not more than 24 inches in width or where otherwise specifically provided for by this title, from 30 inches above the ground level to the sky on the same lot on which a building is situated; provided, however, fencing, customary yard accessories, play structures without moving parts, ornaments and furniture, except for bleachers which are in excess of 60 inches in height, are permitted in any yard, subject to such height limitations and requirements limiting obstructions or visibility as are provided in KGBC 18.60.020 or are otherwise provided by the KGB Code.
“Yard, front” means a yard extending across the full width of a lot measured between the front lot line of the lot and the front building line. A corner lot shall be considered to have two front yards.
“Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the most rear main building and the rear lot line.
“Yard, side” means a yard on each side of a main building and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line. The width of the required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of a side lot line to the nearest part of the main building.
[Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.10.270 “Z” definitions.

“Zoning change” means the alteration or moving of a use district boundary; the reclassification of a lot or parcel of land from one zone to another, the change of any of the regulations contained in this title.
“Zoning official” means the person charged with the administration and enforcement of this title.
“Zoning ordinance” or “ordinance” means the Ketchikan Gateway Borough zoning ordinance (this title).


CHAPTER 18.20 Introduction

18.20.010 Title and effective date.

This title shall be officially known as “Title 18 of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough Code of Ordinances.” It also may be called “Title 18,” the “zoning ordinance,” or the “land use regulations” and is referred to throughout this document as “this title.” This title shall become effective on August 8, 2023.


18.20.020 Authority.

This title is adopted pursuant to authority granted by the Alaska Constitution and the Alaska Statutes, specifically:
(a) AS 29.40.010. Requires a first or second class borough to provide planning, platting, and land use regulations on an area-wide basis.
(b) AS 29.40.020. Requires the establishment of a planning commission, which is charged with, among other things, preparing a comprehensive plan for adoption by the borough assembly.
(c) AS 29.40.040. Requires the adoption, by ordinance, of provisions governing the use and occupancy of land.


18.20.030 Purpose of this title.

The purpose of this title is to implement the comprehensive plan in a manner which protects the public health, safety, welfare, and economic vitality by:
(a) Encouraging land development patterns that promote the public health, safety and welfare now and into the future;
(b) Encouraging the efficient use of existing infrastructure and the available land supply;
(c) Promoting a pattern of land use and development upon which to provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewerage, and other public facilities;
(d) Providing appropriate development incentives to achieve an economically balanced and diverse community and to further the economic development goals of the municipality;
(e) Promoting development patterns that protect and enhance the surrounding community character;
(f) Encouraging a diverse supply of quality housing located in safe and livable neighborhoods;
(g) Encouraging a balanced supply of nonresidential land uses that are compatible with adjacent land uses and have good access to appropriate infrastructure;
(h) Protecting the diversity of fish and wildlife habitats by minimizing adverse impacts of land development on economically valuable natural resources and features;
(i) Encouraging development of a sustainable and accessible system of recreational facilities, parks, trails, and natural open space that meets neighborhood and community-wide needs.


18.20.040 Ketchikan Gateway Borough Comprehensive Plan adopted.

The borough assembly shall adopt by ordinance the official comprehensive plan of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough. The comprehensive plan may include, but is not limited to:
(a) Statements of policies, goals, and standards;
(b) A land use plan;
(c) A community facilities plan;
(d) A transportation plan;
(e) Parks and recreation plan; and
(f) Neighborhood plans.


18.20.050 Periodic comprehensive plan review.

The planning commission shall periodically undertake and complete an overall review of the current comprehensive plan, and shall present recommendations, based on such review, to the assembly.


18.20.060 Saxman development plan adopted.

The document consisting of text, maps and charts, entitled “Saxman Neighborhood Development Plan,” dated 1967, is hereby adopted as the Saxman neighborhood development plan.


18.20.070 Saxman development plan review.

In order that the Saxman neighborhood development plan shall be at all times current with the needs of the city of Saxman and the borough, and shall represent the best thinking of the city of Saxman and the borough assembly, the borough planning commission and the boards, commissions and departments within the borough in the light of changing conditions, the planning commission shall every 10 years review the Saxman neighborhood development plan and recommend to the assembly and the Saxman city council extensions, changes or additions to the plan which the planning commission considers necessary. Should the commission find that no changes are necessary, this finding should be reported. This review procedure should be timed so that any necessary amendments to the plan may be adopted by the council prior to the commencement of any major improvements.


18.20.080 Severability.

(a) Invalidating a Provision. If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision of this title, then such judgment shall not affect the validity and continued enforcement of any other provision of this title.
(b) Invalidating the Application of a Provision. If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the application of any provision of this title, then such judgment shall not affect the application of that provision to any other building, structure, or use not specifically included in that judgment, unless the circumstances leading to the invalidation are the same or substantially similar with respect to the other building, structure, or use.
(c) Invalidating a Condition. If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any condition attached to the approval of an application for development approval, then such judgment shall not affect any other conditions or requirements attached to the same approval that are not specifically included in that judgment, unless the circumstances leading to the invalidation of the condition are the same or substantially similar.


18.20.090 Borough held harmless.

The Ketchikan Gateway Borough shall not be held liable for any conflicts between private citizens that may arise as a result of this title.


18.20.100 Zoning official.

A zoning official, designated by the borough manager, shall administer and enforce this title. The zoning official may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the borough assembly deems necessary.


CHAPTER 18.30 General Provisions

18.30.010 Interpretation of zone boundaries.

Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(a) Boundaries as encompassing rights-of-way shall be construed as following the property lines abutting the rights-of-way.
(b) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
(c) Boundaries indicated as approximately following borough limits shall be construed as following borough limits.
(d) All areas within the corporate limit of the borough which are under water and are not shown as included within any zone shall be subject to all of the regulations of the zone which immediately adjoins the water area. Uses on submerged lands that are physically connected to the uplands shall be limited to uses that are accessory to the principal use(s) of the uplands to which they are connected.
(e) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (a) through (d) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(f) Platted lots containing more than one zoning district shall be construed as allowing the uses each zoning district allows within the portion of said lot located in each zoning district, subject to provision that the area within each district must meet the minimum lot size and width requirements of that zone. Areas that do not meet this criteria shall be subject to the use and development requirements of the most restrictive zone on the lot that abuts the area not meeting the criteria.
(g) The zoning regulations shall apply equally to private and public property.
(h) Property which has not been specifically included within a zone or land annexed to the borough shall be classified as FD until such classification is changed by amendment of the zoning ordinances as provided by law.
(i) Where the street or property layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (a) through (g) of this section, the planning commission shall interpret the zone boundaries.


18.30.020 Application of zone regulations.

This title establishes minimum regulations within each zone that apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as herein provided:
(a) No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the zone in which it is located.
(b) No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
(1) To exceed the height; or
(2) To accommodate or house a greater number of families; or
(3) To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
(4) To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than herein required; or
(5) In any other manner be contrary to the provisions of this title.
(c) No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this title, shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
(d) No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this title shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall meet minimum requirements established by this title.
(e) Wherever there is a conflict between this title and other chapters pertaining to the regulation of property within the borough, the most restrictive regulation shall apply.
(f) Mobile Buildings.
(1) Except as provided for in KGBC 18.50.020(v)(2) or on lands within the Mobile Building Unrestricted zone, as described in Chapter 18.40 KGBC, it is unlawful for any person to place, construct, maintain, or operate either mobile building parks, mobile building sales lots, travel trailer parks, mobile buildings on residential lots, as temporary dwelling units on construction sites, or as 24-hour watchman’s quarters on nonresidential lots, or to make a major alteration in mobile building parks, mobile building sales lots, or travel trailer parks unless a conditional use permit from the planning commission has been issued as specified in this chapter. A “major alteration” shall mean any alteration which affects any of the design requirements specified in this chapter or conditions attached to the existing conditional use permit. For the purposes of this title, the term “mobile building” shall mean both commercial and residential mobile buildings unless otherwise noted.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this title, no mobile building or travel trailer shall stand in the open on any property for more than 10 days, nor shall a mobile building or travel trailer be used as a place of habitation or business for any period of time without first obtaining the necessary conditional use permits or zoning permits or being located in an approved mobile building park or travel trailer park, as specified by this title. Unoccupied travel trailers on residential lots are not subject to this title.
(3) Conditional use permits shall not be required for mobile buildings on residential lots, as temporary shelters on construction sites, or as office, commercial or watchman’s quarters on nonresidential lots for those lots subject to MBU zone, as described in Chapter 18.40 KGBC, nor for any buildings not defined as mobile buildings. Such buildings shall be subject to zoning permits as specified by KGBC 18.90.020.
(4) Mobile buildings or travel trailers stored on industrial lots while in transit by a bona fide commercial shipper shall be subject to the requirements of the zone in which they are located, notwithstanding the provisions of the MBR zone as described in Chapter 18.40 KGBC, and are not required to obtain a conditional use permit; provided, that said mobile buildings or travel trailers shall not be occupied, nor shall they be connected to electrical systems, except for the purpose of maintaining the structure in its original factory condition while in transit, or to sewer or water systems, nor shall the storage area be used as a mobile building sales lot.


18.30.030 Nonconforming uses and structures.

(a) Explanation. When a lot, structure, or use legally exists prior to the date of adoption of this title, or the date of adoption of an ordinance codified in this title, that does not meet the requirements of this title, it is permitted to continue within the limits set forth in this chapter. Under such circumstances it is said to have nonconforming status. There are three types of nonconforming status:
(1) Nonconforming Lots. The lot width or acreage is smaller than the minimum permitted in the zone in which it is located.
(2) Nonconforming Structures. The structure fails to meet yard, coverage, height or other development requirements established for the zone in which it is located.
(3) Nonconforming Uses of Land and/or Structures. The use to which land and/or structures is being put could not be permitted under the provisions of this title in the zone in which it is located because:
a. The use is not listed as a principal, conditional, or accessory use permitted in the zone in which it is located; or
b. The use is listed as a principal, conditional, or accessory use permitted in the zone in which it is located, but the development requirements for the use are not met.
(b) Intent. Within the zones established by this title and any future amendments, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before the date of adoption of this title or the date of adoption of an ordinance codified in this title, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this title or future amendments. It is the intent of this title to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this title to be incompatible with permitted uses in the zones involved. It is further the intent of this title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded nor extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone.
(c) Nonconforming Lots of Record. Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this title, any single lot of record which lawfully existed prior to the date of adoption of this title or the date of adoption of an ordinance codified in this title may be used for any use allowed in the zone in which it is located; provided, that:
(1) Yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the zone in which such lot is located.
(2) Unless otherwise provided for in this title, variance of yard requirements and of other development requirements shall be obtained only through action of the planning commission as provided in KGBC 18.90.030(c).
(3) In any residential zone that allows more than one dwelling unit per lot, one single-family dwelling is allowed as a principal use. Accessory uses are allowed as accessory to the single-family dwelling.
(4) In any residential zone that allows more than one dwelling unit per lot, dwellings that increase the residential density of the lot above one dwelling unit are allowed as a conditional use as provided in KGBC 18.90.040(c). Residential density must conform to the provisions of the zone in which it is located. Accessory uses are allowed as accessory to the dwellings.
(d) Nonconforming structures shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) Except as otherwise provided for in this title, a structure may not be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity.
(2) A nonconforming structure which is destroyed or damaged through no fault of the owner may be repaired or reconstructed. A zoning permit shall be issued within one year of the date of the damage and the actual construction, including permanent installation of construction materials, shall be commenced and diligently continued to completion.
(3) A nonconforming structure shall be considered in conformity with this title if all nonconforming aspects of the structure are abated by relocating the structure, replatting lot lines, variances granted by the planning commission as provided in KGBC 18.90.030(c), or any combination thereof.
(4) A structure that is demolished because of damage resulting from normal wear and tear or deferred maintenance may only be reconstructed in accordance with the development standards of the zone in which it is located. Variance of yard requirements and of other development requirements shall be obtained only through action of the planning commission as provided in KGBC 18.90.030(c).
(e) Nonconforming Uses of Structures. The lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No existing structures devoted to a use not permitted by this title in the zone in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zone in which it is located.
(2) Existing structures devoted to a use that is permitted by this title in the zone in which it is located, but that fails to satisfy the development standards for the use may be changed to any other use that is similarly permitted; provided, that the nonconformity is not increased.
(3) Any nonconforming use may:
a. Be extended throughout any parts of a structure which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this title.
b. No such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such structure.
(4) If no structural alterations are made, any use of a structure that is nonconforming because it is not a principal, conditional, or accessory use in the zone in which it is located may be changed to another that is not a principal, conditional, or accessory use through the conditional use permit process as provided in KGBC 18.90.040(c).
(5) Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a use that is nonconforming because it is not a principal, conditional, or accessory use in the zone in which it is located is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zone in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
(6) Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, when a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18 months or more during any three-year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
(7) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land; provided, however, a structure devoted to a nonconforming residential use which is accidentally damaged or destroyed may be repaired or replaced subject to the conditions listed in subsection (d) of this section.
(f) Nonconforming Use of Land. Where, at the effective date of this title or the date of adoption of an ordinance codified in this title, a lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this title as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(2) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(3) If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 30 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which such land is located.
(g) General Provisions.
(1) Signs and Display Devices. A nonconforming use of a structure, nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter by attachment of additional signs to a building, or the placement of additional signs or display devices on the land outside of the building, or by the addition of other uses, if such additions are of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the zone involved.
(2) Construction Begun Prior to Passage. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the date of adoption of this title or the date of adoption of an ordinance codified in this title and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. “Actual construction” is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner, and demolition, elimination and removal of an existing structure in connection with such construction; provided, that actual construction work shall be diligently carried on until the completion of the building involved.
(3) Conditional Uses. Any use for which a conditional use permit is granted as provided in KGBC 18.90.040 shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such zone.
(4) Variances.
a. Any nonconforming structure for which a variance has been granted as provided for in KGBC 18.90.030 shall not be deemed a nonconforming structure, but shall be deemed a conforming structure; provided, that said variance addresses all nonconformities of the structure.
b. Any nonconforming lot of record for which a variance has been granted, as provided for in KGBC 17.10.040, shall not be deemed a nonconforming lot, but shall be deemed a conforming lot.
(5) Repairs and Maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or on any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing subject to:
a. Work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months; and
b. The cost of repairs does not exceed 20 percent of the current assessed value of the structure; and
c. The cubical content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be increased.
(6) Exception to This Chapter – Outside Storage of Junked Vehicles and Junk or Wrecking Yards. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, no junked vehicle or junk shall be stored outside and no unenclosed junk or wrecking yard shall be maintained in any zone other than an IH zone for more than six months after the date of adoption of this title or the date of adoption of an ordinance codified in this title.


CHAPTER 18.40 Zoning and Overlay Districts

18.40.010 Establishment of zoning districts.

(a) Intent. Zoning districts are the primary tool by which the purposes contained in this title are accomplished. Lands are zoned based on characteristics such as topography, proximity to, and demand for, infrastructure, demand for municipal services, and compatibility with surrounding lands.
(b) The Ketchikan Gateway Borough is hereby divided into the following zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map.
(1) FD Zone – Future Development Zone. The FD zone is established to apply to areas which should be preserved in a natural state to be used primarily as recreation areas and as watersheds and wildlife reserves. This zone also applies to areas of natural resources which, where possible, should be conserved and extracted on a sustained yield basis and should be developed in a manner which is not harmful to nearby recreational and residential uses.
(2) RR Zone – Rural Residential Zone. The RR zone is established to provide borough residents with greater variety in the sizes of lots available for residential development. The RR zone will provide for the retention of large lot sizes for residents who prefer the rural lifestyle associated with very low density residential development, as well as provide for more effective on-site sewage treatment. The principal use permitted in the RR zone is limited to a single one-family dwelling unit per lot.
(3) CC Zone – Central Commercial Zone. The CC zone is established to provide for the area of intensive land use and highly valued property in the core of the central business district. Uses are permitted and prohibited with the intention of reserving this zone for commercial activities which are mutually beneficial if located together in an area of concentrated development. Ground floor frontage is generally limited to those uses requiring window display area or walk-in trade. To accomplish this intent, major manufacturing uses are prohibited and automotive uses and other uses which would interfere with pedestrian and vehicular circulation are permitted only under certain conditions.
(4) CG Zone – General Commercial Zone. The CG zone is established to provide for areas where a broad range of retail, wholesale and service establishments is desirable. Uses are regulated to concentrate commercial development as far as possible and to prevent any uses which would have an adverse effect upon adjoining commercial and nearby residential properties.
(5) RS Zone – Suburban Residential Zone. The RS zone is established to allow single-family and two-family residential structures in areas where larger lots are desirable. The RS zone is intended to encourage low density residential development while at the same time protecting the environmental features which add to the desirability of suburban residential living.
(6) RL Zone – Low Density Residential Zone. The RL zone is established to provide for residential development in outlying and rural areas in a form which creates a stable and satisfying environment which is suitable for family life. The specific intent in establishing this zone is:
a. To separate residential structures to an extent which will:
1. Preserve the rural, open quality of the environment;
2. Prevent health hazards in areas not served by public water and sewer.
b. To prohibit uses which would:
1. Violate the residential character of the environment;
2. Generate heavy traffic in predominantly residential areas.
(7) RN Zone– Neighborhood Residential Zone. The RN zone is established to provide for areas where a predominantly suburban residential neighborhood development is desirable, and public sewer facilities or common marine outfalls are available, allowing for smaller lots than low density but still large enough to maintain the privacy and extra yard space desirable for family-oriented residential development. Nonresidential uses are permitted or prohibited on the basis of their compatibility with the residential character of the neighborhood. Accessory structures not subordinate or in character with residential use are prohibited.
(8) RM Zone – Medium Density Residential Zone. The RM zone is established to provide for areas where a predominantly medium density residential development is desirable. Nonresidential uses are permitted or prohibited on the basis of their compatibility with the residential character of the environment.
(9) RH Zone – High Density Residential Zone. The RH zone is established to provide for areas where a predominantly high density residential development is desirable. Nonresidential uses are permitted or prohibited on the basis of their compatibility with the residential character of the environment.
(10) IL Zone – Light Industrial Zone. The IL zone is designed to provide for the development of industrial and commercial uses which are mutually compatible and which either:
a. Are of a type which has no nuisance effect upon surrounding property; or
b. May be controlled to prevent any nuisance effects upon surrounding property. Some residential uses and other nonindustrial uses are excluded from this zone because an industrial area is a poor environment for such uses and because it is intended that land in this zone be reserved for industrial and commercial uses.
(11) IH Zone – Heavy Industrial Zone. The IH zone is established to provide for a broad range of industrial uses and for commercial uses which are a beneficial part of such industrial development. Some residential uses and other nonindustrial uses are excluded from this zone because an industrial area is a poor environment for such uses and because it is intended that land in this zone be reserved for industrial and commercial purposes. This zone is intended to be separated from other zones by railyards, open spaces or natural boundaries such as rivers, streams and bluffs.
(12) AD Zone – Airport Development Zone. The AD zone is established to provide for the development of commercial and industrial uses which are a part of or are compatible with the operation of a public airport. The AD zone is intended to encourage development of airport-related businesses and industries while protecting the limited land area from unrelated development. Development within the AD zone should be consistent with the airport master plan.
(13) HD Zone – Creek Street Historic District. The borough assembly hereby finds that excessive uniformity, dissimilarity, inappropriateness, poor quality of design and dishonest expression of materials in the exterior appearance of buildings erected in any neighborhood adversely affects the desirability of the immediate area and neighboring areas for residential and business purposes or other uses and by so doing impairs the benefits of occupancy of existing property in such areas, impairs the stability and value of both improved and unimproved real property in such areas, prevents the most appropriate development of such areas, produces degeneration of property in such areas with attendant deterioration of conditions adversely affecting health, safety, comfort and a general welfare of the inhabitants thereof, and destroys a proper relationship between the taxable value of real property in such areas and the cost of municipal services provided therefor. It is the purpose of this chapter to prevent these and other harmful effects of such exterior appearances of buildings erected in the HD zone and thus to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the community, to promote the public convenience and prosperity, conserve the value of buildings, encourage the most appropriate use of land within the HD zone, provide for orderly development within the HD zone, prevent overcrowding and stimulate systematic and aesthetic development of property within the HD zone.
(14) PLI Zone – Public Lands and Institutions Zone. The PLI zone is intended to reserve large or contiguous parcels of land for a city, borough, state, or federal agency, public school district, or public utility in order to develop compatible public service uses including, but not limited to, open space, recreational, administrative, and educational uses. Certain public uses of an industrial or correctional nature may be permitted as conditional uses provided they are compatible with surrounding development.
(15) PUD Zone – Planned Unit Development Zone. The intent of the planned unit development (PUD) zone is to promote efficient and economic uses of land by providing developers with additional choices in design and land use mix without the use of existing zoning districts with differing development standards and permitted land uses through flexible design standards. A PUD also lowers development and building costs by permitting smaller networks of utilities and streets while promoting shared facilities.


18.40.020 Establishment of overlay zoning districts.

(a) Intent. Overlay zones are used to modify the requirements of underlying zoning district in specific areas where such modifications are desirable. Overlay zones can modify development requirements, add or remove uses, apply aesthetic or architectural standards, or otherwise encourage land use patterns that meet the community vision of the specific areas where they are implemented.
(b) The following overlay zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the official zoning map:
(1) The Cottage Industry (CI) zone is an overlay zone intended to encourage small-scale home-based businesses in outlying areas where the lack of roaded access to retail, wholesale and service establishments has caused future development and residential zoned properties to take on a commercial and/or industrial character in support of a self-sufficient lifestyle. The CI zone recognizes the need for these “cottage industries” in outlying areas to continue to prosper and the need to protect the health, safety, and quiet enjoyment of the residential character of the underlying zone. Where provisions of the CI zone conflict with KGBC 18.50.020(j)(1), Home occupations, the provisions of the CI zone shall apply.
(2) The Central Parking Area (CPA) overlay zone is created to maximize the commercial use of lands accessed predominately by pedestrians by allowing land owners to develop their properties without using real estate for parking.
(3) The Mobile Building Restricted (MBR) zone is established as an addition to existing zoning classifications. It is intended that this zone overlay existing zones and that the zoning requirements of both zones coexist to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community. Mobile buildings are a prohibited use in this zone, except that manufactured homes, mobile buildings on construction sites and mobile buildings or travel trailers stored on industrial lots while in transit by a bona fide commercial shipper, and mobile food vendors, are allowed in this zone.
(4) The Mobile Building Unrestricted (MBU) zone is established as an addition to existing zoning classifications. It is intended that this zone overlay existing zones and that the zoning requirements of both zones coexist to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community. Mobile buildings are allowed in this zone as a principal permitted use.
(5) The Newtown Overlay (NT) zone is established to protect the property and neighborhoods’ property values, and the image of the city of Ketchikan and the Ketchikan Gateway Borough by establishing minimum development standards.


18.40.030 Official zoning map.

(a) The zoning district map GIS layer shown on the map entitled “Official Zoning Map” is hereby adopted as a digital map, and known as the “digital zoning map for the Ketchikan Gateway Borough,” enacted upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 2022, as adopted by the assembly.
(b) The official zoning map shall be kept in the department of planning and community development. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the copy of the official zoning map that is located in the department of planning and community development shall be the final official zoning map authority regarding the current zoning status of land and water areas; provided, however, in the event of any discrepancy between the official zoning map and a specific ordinance zoning or changing the zoning of a property or area, the description and zoning set forth in the amending ordinance shall control and prevail over the official zoning map.
(c) Changes to the official zoning map resulting by reason of a rezone ordinance adopted by the assembly shall be entered on the official zoning map by the borough manager or designee in accordance with the provisions of KGBC 18.90.050(c)(8).
(d) In the event the official zoning map, or any part thereof, becomes damaged, lost or destroyed, the borough assembly may adopt a new official zoning map as herein provided which shall be based upon and generated from the most current digital zoning map, and upon adoption such new zoning map, or part thereof, shall supersede the prior official zoning map, or part thereof, and thereafter constitute the official zoning map.


18.40.040 Official zoning map review.

The department of planning and community development shall annually submit to the planning commission for review and comment a report regarding the status of zoning within the borough and any changes in zoning made by the assembly during the prior year.


CHAPTER 18.50 Land Use

18.50.010 Land use allowances.

The land use table provides a list of uses and the zoning classifications where the use is categorized as either accessory, permitted, permitted with standards or as a conditional use. Any use or structure not listed under permitted, accessory, permitted with standards or conditional uses shall be prohibited.
(a) Accessory Uses (A). Accessory uses customarily incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted principal, conditional, and permitted with standards uses are listed in the land use table with an “A.” These uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards, other standards of this title, are on the same parcel as the permitted use they are accessory to, and do not create a hazard or nuisance.
(b) Permitted Uses (P). Uses permitted in the residential zones are listed in the land use table with a “P.” These uses are allowed if they comply with the development standards and other standards of this title.
(c) Permitted with Standards (P/S). Uses permitted that are subject to specific limitations that are listed in KGBC 18.50.020 are listed in the land use table with a “P/S.” The specific limitations are in addition to the development standards and other standards of this title, including, but not limited to, the standards contained in KGBC 18.90.020.
(d) Conditional Uses (C). Uses that are allowed if approved through the conditional use process are listed in the land use table with a “C.” These uses are allowed provided they comply with the conditional use approval criteria contained in KGBC 18.90.040. Some uses are subject to additional standards listed in KGBC 18.50.030. Such uses are noted as being subject to special circumstances.
(e) Prohibited Uses (X). Uses listed in the land use table with an “X” are prohibited as principal, conditional, or permitted with standards uses. Also prohibited is any use or structure not listed under permitted principal, accessory or conditional uses.
(f) Table of Allowed Land Uses.

Category | Use | Zoning Districts 1
RR | RS | RL | RN | RM | RH | CC | CG | FD | IL | IH | AD | HD 44 | PLI | CI 3 | MBU | MBR 12
Communication | Antennas | A 8 | A 8 | A 8 | A 8 | A 8 | A 8 | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Earth station | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Telecommunications hotel | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Telecommunications facilities 9 | C | C | C | X | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | X | C | NA | NA | NA
 | Telecommunications antennas | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | X | A | NA | NA | NA
Entertainment | Cabarets | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | X | NA | NA | NA
 | Commercial museum | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Fraternal organizations | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Outdoor entertainment facility | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Performance theater | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Private clubs | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Seasonal entertainment facility | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Stadium | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P |  | NA | NA
 | Theaters | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
Food/beverage | Bakeries | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Bars | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | X |  | NA | NA
 | Breweries | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | X | C | NA | NA
 | Cafes and cocktail lounges | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P |  | NA | NA
 | Catering 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Distilleries | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Mobile food vendor 11 | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | C | C | C | C | X | C |  | NA | NA 12
 | Restaurants | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Restaurants, drive-through | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Restaurants, drive-up | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
Funerary | Cemeteries and graveyards | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Crematoriums | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | P | P | X | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Mortuaries | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | P | P | X | X | P | C | NA | NA
Health care | Birthing center | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | C | X | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Convalescent homes | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | C | X | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Dental clinics | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Detoxification facilities | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | C | P | C | X | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Doctor's offices 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | X | P | P | P | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Eye care clinics | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Hospitals | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | X | P | C | X | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Inpatient treatment | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | C | P | C | X | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Nursing homes | X | X | X | C | C | C | C | P | C | C | C | X | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Therapy clinics 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Urgent care centers | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P |  | NA | NA
Industrial | Arts and crafts studios 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | X | P | P | X | P | X | NA | NA | NA
 | Assembly 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | C 7 | C 7 | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Auto wrecking and junkyards | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | P | X | C |  | NA | NA
 | Firearm manufacture 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Cabinet shops 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Fabrication 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | X | C 7 | X | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Food processing plants | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | P | P | P | X | C |  | NA | NA
 | Handicraft 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Hot-mix asphalt and concrete batch plants 13 | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | P | C | C | C | C | NA | NA
 | Light assembly 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Light fabrication 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Light manufacturing 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | C 7 | C 7 | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Manufacturing | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 7 | X | P | P | P | X | C |  | NA | NA
 | Maintenance and repair centers | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | X | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Welding shops | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Wood processing plants | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | C |  | NA | NA
Lodging | Bed and breakfast | P/S 14 | P/S 14 | P/S 14 | P/S 14 | P/S 14 | P/S 14 | P | P | A | X | X | X | P | X | NA | NA | NA
 | Boarding and rooming houses | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | X | P | X | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Dormitories | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Hostel | C | C | C | C | C | X | P | P | C | C | C | X | X | X | C | NA | NA
 | Hotels and motels | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | X | X | X | C | NA | NA
 | Short-term rentals 45 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | X | X | X | P/S | X | NA | NA | NA
Marijuana | Marijuana concentrate manufacturing facility | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 15 | P/SC 16 | X | P/SC 16 | P/SC 16 | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Marijuana cultivation facility | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 15 | P/SC 16 | X | P/SC 16 | P/SC 16 | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Marijuana cultivation facility , limited | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 15 | P/SC 16 | X | P/SC 16 | P/SC 16 | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Marijuana establishment | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 15 | P/SC 16 | X | P/SC 16 | P/SC 16 | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Marijuana product manufacturing facility | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 15 | P/SC 16 | X | P/SC 16 | P/SC 16 | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Marijuana retail store | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 15 | P/SC 16 | X | P/SC 16 | P/SC 16 | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Marijuana testing facility | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | On-site marijuana consumption | X | X | X | X | X | X | A 17 | A 17 | X | A 17 | A 17 | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
Marine | Boat fueling | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Boat rental | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Boat repair | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | X | P | P | P | X | C | C | NA | NA
 | Boat sales | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Boathouses | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Commercial docks | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Hanging, repairing, and storage of fishing gear | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Harbors and marinas | C | C | C | C | C | X | P | P | C | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Private docks | A | A | A | A | A | A | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Small boat construction or repair | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | C | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
Meeting | Convention centers | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Meeting halls | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P |  | NA | NA
 | Union halls | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P |  | NA | NA
Miscellaneous | Accessory uses such as garages, sheds, decks, greenhouses, play areas, and off- street parking | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | NA | NA | NA
 | All accessory uses permitted in the underlying zone | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A 21 | A
 | All conditional uses permitted in the underlying zone | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C 21 | C
 | All principal uses permitted in the underlying zone | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P 21 | P
 | All tax-exempt uses 18 | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | X | C | C | C | NA | NA | NA 12
 | All uses not otherwise prohibited by law | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Alternate energy systems | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | P | P | C | C | NA | NA | NA
 | Cottage industries 19 | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | NA | NA
 | Home occupations 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P/S | P | P | X | P | X | NA | NA | NA
 | Industrial use compatible with airport development | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Signs 20 | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A |  | NA | NA | NA
 | Site development associated with development for which a zoning permit has been issued | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A | A |  | NA | NA
 | Temporary uses and buildings 21 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | NA | NA | NA 12
Mobile building | Mobile building parks 23 | X | X | C | C | C | X | X | C | X | C | X | X | X | C | NA | P 22 | X
 | Mobile buildings 24 | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | C | NA | P 22 | X
 | Mobile buildings as watchman’s quarters | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 42 | C 42 | C 42 | C 42 | C 25 , 42 | C 42 | X | C 42 | NA | P 22 | X
 | Mobile buildings as caretaker’s quarters | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 42 | C 42 | C 42 | C 42 | C 25 , 42 | C 42 | X | C 42 | NA | P 22 | X
 | Mobile buildings as offices | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 42 | C 42 | C 42 | C 42 | P | C 42 | X | C 42 | NA | P 22 | X
 | Mobile buildings on residential lots | C 43 | C 43 | C 43 | C 43 | C 43 | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | NA | P 22 | X
 | Mobile buildings on commercial lots | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 42 | C 42 | C 42 | C 42 | P | C 42 | X | C 42 | NA | P 22 | X
 | Mobile buildings on construction sites | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | C 41 | NA | P 22 | X
 | Mobile buildings as residences on construction sites |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | C 12 , 41
 | Travel trailer parks 26 | X | X | C | C | C | X | C | C | C | C | C | X | X | C | C | P 22 | X
Municipal | Animal shelters | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | X | C | C | C | X | C |  | NA | NA
 | Community facilities | X | C | C | C | C | X | C | P | X | P | C | C | X | C | NA | NA | NA
 | Correctional institutions | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | C | P | X | C | X | NA | NA
 | Essential services | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Fire protection facilities | C | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | C | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Law enforcement facilities | C | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | C | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Parks | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Public libraries | C | X | X | X | C | X | P | P | X | P | P | X | P | P |  | NA | NA
 | Military installations | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Public museums | X | X | X | X | C | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P |  | NA | NA
 | Playgrounds and playfields | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Public utility facilities | C | C | C | C | C | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Sanitary landfills | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | X | X | C |  | NA | NA
 | Schools, elementary and secondary | C | C | C | C | C | X | X | P | P | P | C | C | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Sewage treatment facilities | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | C | P | P | X | C |  | NA | NA
Office | Administrative offices 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | A | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Business offices 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | A | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Professional offices 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Service offices 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
Parking | Parking structures | C | C | C | C | C | C | C 6 | P | X | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Private parking lots | C | C | C | C | C | C | C 6 | P | X | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Public parking lots | C | C | C | C | C | C | C 6 | P | X | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
Recreation | Campgrounds, hunting and fishing areas, skiing areas and other developments for outdoor recreation | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Commercial recreational uses | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Recreational clubs | X | C | C | C | C | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Golf courses | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | X | X | C | NA | NA
 | Indoor shooting facility 27 | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | C | C | C | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Lodges | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | X | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Outdoor shooting facility 27 | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | X | C | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
Religious | Churches 28 | X | C | C | C | C | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Convents 29 | X | X | X | X | C | X | P | P | X | P | P | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
Reserves | Forest reserves | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Greenbelts, land reserves and open space | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | X | P | X | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Watershed reserves and wildlife preserves | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | X | P | X | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
Residential | Detached accessory dwelling units | X | P/S 30 | P/S 30 | P/S 30 | P/S 30 | P | P | P | X | X | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Caretaker’s quarters | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Four-family dwelling | X | X | X | X | P/S C 31 | P | P | P | X | P | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Manufactured homes | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Multifamily group housing developments | P | X | C 32 | C 32 | X | P | P | P | X | P | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Multiple-family dwellings | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | X | P | X | X | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | One-family dwellings | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | X | X | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Townhouse dwellings | X | X | X | X | X | P/S 33 | P | P | X | X | X | X | X | X | NA | NA | NA
 | Triplex dwellings | X | X | P/SC 34 | X | P/S C 34 | P | P | P | X | X | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Twinhouse dwellings | X | P/S 35 | P/S 35 | P/S 35 | P/S 35 | P/S 35 | P | P | X | X | X | X | X | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Two-family dwellings | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | X | X | X | P | X | NA | NA | NA
 | Watchman’s quarters | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P |  | NA | NA
Resource industry | Log transfer facilities | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | P | P | X | C | C | NA | NA
 | Natural resource extraction | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | P | C 36 | P | P | X | C 36 | NA | NA | NA
 | Natural resource processing | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | C 36 | P | P | X | C 36 | NA | NA | NA
 | Sawmills | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | X | C | C 37 | NA | NA
 | Small scale food and seafood processing operations | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | X | C | P | X | X | C | C | NA | NA
Retail | Art galleries | X | X | X | X | C | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Bulky retail | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Commercial shopping center | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 40 | C 40 | X | C | P | C 40 | X | X | NA | NA | NA
 | Garden stand | C | C | C | C | C | C | P | P | C | P | P | P | P | P | NA | NA | NA
 | Gift shops | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Internet sales 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P/S | P | P | P | P | P |  | NA | NA
 | Nonbulky retail | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Wholesale businesses | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
Service | Banks | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Beauty salon 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Boarding kennels 38 | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | X | C | C | C | X | C | C | NA | NA
 | Business and consumer services | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Commercial day care | C | C | C | C | C | C | P | P | X | C | C | X | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Contractors’ yards | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Laundromats | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Newspaper and printing establishments | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Pet grooming 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Photographic studio 10 | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P/S | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Preschools | C | C | C | C | C | C | P | P | X | C | C | X | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Radio and television studios | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Residential kennels 39 | C | C | C | C | C | X | C | C | C | C | X | X | X | X | C | NA | NA
 | Residential daycare for hire | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P/S | P | P | P | X | X | X | X | X |  | NA | NA
 | Tanning salon | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Tattoo parlor | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
 | Veterinary clinics | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | X | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
Shipping | Air freight and cargo facilities | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | X | X | C | NA | NA
 | Barge and marine terminals | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | P | P | P | X | A | C | NA | NA
 | Ferry terminals | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C | C | P | P | P | X | C | C | NA | NA
 | Post offices | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | X | P | P | P | P | P | C | NA | NA
Storage | Auto and boat storage | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | X | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Bulk fuel storage | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | A | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Covered storage | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 7 | A | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Enclosed storage | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C7 | A | P | P | P | P | X | C | NA | NA
 | Equipment storage yards | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | C 7 | A | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA
 | Open storage | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | A | A | C | P | P | X | A |  | NA | NA
 | Storage of explosives | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | X | X | P |  | NA | NA
 | Self storage | X | X | X | X | X | X | P | P | P | P | P | P | X | P | C | NA | NA

Special Circumstances
1The Newtown overlay zone is not included because it only imposes development requirements and does not affect uses.
2The keeping of animals solely for the personal, noncommercial use of the owner or occupant of the lot on which the animals are located is allowed as an accessory use in all zones.
3Uses that are subject to less stringent permitting requirements in the underlying zone are subject to the less stringent permitting requirements.
4Hobby gardens are allowed without a permit, except that structures not exempt under KGBC 18.90.020(b) must be permitted as required in this title.
5Residential gardens are allowed without a permit, except that structures not exempt under KGBC 18.90.020(b) must be permitted as required in this title.
6In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), this use is subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(r)(1).
7In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), this use is subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(o)(2).
8As Accessory Uses. Noncommercial antennas 15 feet in height or less above rooflines in residential zones and commercial or public use antennas 30 feet in height or less above rooflines in nonresidential zones are allowed as accessory uses to an existing structure in all zones without a permit. This exemption includes:
aAny satellite earth station antenna six feet in diameter or less which is located in nonresidential zones; or
bAny satellite earth station reception antenna four and one-half feet or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category.
9In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), telecommunication facilities are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(v)(2).
10In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, this use is subject to the home occupation standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(j)(1) when located in a residential zone, or any other zone where the lot is used exclusively for residential purposes.
11In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), mobile food vendors are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(o)(7).
12Mobile buildings are prohibited on lands within this classification except as:
aConditional uses for the following purposes: mobile buildings owned and operated by the State of Alaska for purposes of housing and maintaining prisoners, for use as offices and/or classrooms within Public Lands and Institutions zones, travel trailer parks when located in the CC, CG, PLI, or FD zones, and mobile buildings or travel trailers stored upon industrial lots while in transit by a bona fide commercial shipper, mobile food vendors, and mobile buildings used as residences on construction sites.
bMobile buildings as temporary uses as contained in KGBC 18.50.020(v)(1).
13In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), hot-mix asphalt and concrete batch plants are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(j)(1).
14In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, bed and breakfasts are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(d)(1).
15In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), marijuana establishments are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(o)(1).
16In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, marijuana establishments are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(o)(1).
17On-site consumption is allowed as an accessory to marijuana retail facilities only.
18In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), tax exempts uses are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(v)(1).
19Uses are allowed as cottage industries in areas that are contained within the Cottage Industry overlay zone.
20Signs are permitted uses subject to the design standards found within Chapter 18.80 KGBC.
21In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, temporary uses are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(v)(1).
22Unless prohibited in the underlying zone.
23In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), mobile building parks are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(o)(4).
24In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), mobile buildings are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(o)(3).
25Mobile buildings as caretaker’s or watchman’s quarters on heavy industrial lots are subject to the requirements for an abbreviated conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(b).
26In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), travel trailer parks are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(o)(5).
27In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), shooting facilities are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(u)(1).
28“Churches” includes synagogues, mosques, temples, and other facilities for organized worship.
29“Convent” includes monasteries, rectories, and other group living facilities for those who are consecrated or ordained.
30In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, detached accessory dwelling units are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(f)(1).
31In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, four-family dwellings are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(h)(1).
32In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040, multifamily group housing is subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(o)(8).
33In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, townhouse dwellings are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(v)(2).
34In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, triplex dwellings are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(v)(3).
35In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, twinhouse dwellings are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(v)(4).
36In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040, natural resource extraction and processing is subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(p)(1).
37Sawmills are limited to 75 horsepower or less.
38In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), boarding kennels are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(m)(1).
39In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), residential kennels are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(m)(2).
40In addition to the requirements for a conditional use permit in KGBC 18.90.040(c), commercial shopping centers are subject to the standards contained in KGBC 18.50.030(e)(1).
41The duration of conditional use permits for mobile buildings on construction sites is one year renewable.
42The duration of conditional use permits for mobile buildings as commercial or watchman’s quarters on nonresidential lots is three years renewable.
43The duration of conditional use permits for mobile buildings on residential lots is three years renewable. A permanent conditional use permit may be granted for that specific mobile building after the expiration of one three-year conditional use permit.
44Principal uses in the HD zone are permitted according to the procedures contained in KGBC 18.90.020(i).
45In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit in KGBC 18.90.020, short-term rentals are subject to the requirements of KGBC 18.50.020(u)(1).
[Ord. No. 2082, §5, 8-18-25; Ord. No. 2048, §9, 9-16-24; Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.50.020 Permitted uses with standards.

(a) Intent and Applicability. Uses without limits are not always appropriate. However, if special standards are applied, the impacts of the uses can be minimized to a point where the use can be allowed. In addition to meeting the special standards listed within this chapter for the particular use, the proposed use must meet all other applicable requirements of this title. In the event of a conflict between the special standard and the other zoning requirements of this title, the special standard shall prevail. Proposed development in accordance with this chapter shall be processed using the zoning permit procedure contained in KGBC 18.90.020.
(b) Organization. For each of the uses contained in this chapter the following information is provided:
(1) Intent. The intent statement is designed to provide an understanding of the benefits and challenges that may accrue from allowing the use, as well as the overall reasoning behind the requirements for specific application and development standards.
(2) Application. The application requirements are in addition to those contained in KGBC 18.90.020.
(3) Development Standards. The development standards are in addition to those of the zone in which the use is permitted and are designed to limit the impacts of the use to achieve consistency with both the intent statement for this chapter as well as that of the specific use.
(4) Permitting. Uses for which permitting requirements change based on compliance with development standards.
(c) “A” Uses. Reserved.
(d) “B” Uses.
(1) Bed and Breakfast.
a. Intent. Bed and breakfasts are permitted to allow entrepreneurs an opportunity to use a portion of their home as a source of additional income by providing temporary lodging. Guests are provided lodging in the business owner’s home. Services are limited to bed and breakfast guests, and the number of guests is limited to reduce the impact on neighboring properties.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.020, the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (d)(1)(c) of this section are met.
1. A floor plan of the home with the areas to be used by guests identified.
2. A copy of the State of Alaska business license for the bed and breakfast.
c. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located, the following standards must be met:
1. No more than three bedrooms may be used.
2. No more than 10 guests may occupy the dwelling at a time.
3. The use may only occur in a one- or two-family dwelling, or a DADU.
i. A DADU with three or fewer bedrooms may be used exclusively as a bed and breakfast if the business owner resides in the principal dwelling.
4. Continuous occupancy by any guest is limited to three weeks.
5. Accessory uses such as gift shops, retail sales of any kind, serving meals to non-bed and breakfast guests, or the hosting of banquets, wedding receptions, and similar events is prohibited.
(e) “C” Uses. Reserved.
(f) “D” Uses.
(1) DADU.
a. Intent.
1. Provide homeowners with flexibility in establishing separate living quarters adjacent to their homes so that they might obtain rental income, companionship, security, or other benefits;
2. Increase the supply of affordable housing within the community, which satisfies provisions of the comprehensive plan; and
3. Ensure that the development of detached accessory dwelling units does not cause unanticipated impacts on the character, public health or stability of residential neighborhoods.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.020, the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (f)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. The gross floor area of the existing home, to include all stories and lofts.
2. Floor plan and gross floor area of the DADU.
c. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located, the following standards must be met:
1. The DADU is limited in size to 1,200 square feet of gross floor area or 60 percent of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling, whichever is less. The gross floor area of the DADU does not include garages and unheated storage areas.
2. Shall not be a mobile building or other nonpermanent structure.
(g) “E” Uses. Reserved.
(h) “F” Uses.
(1) Four-Family Dwellings.
a. Intent. To provide a land owner the opportunity to develop their land with a building to act as multigenerational housing or generate rental income.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.020, the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (h)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. A floor plan of the structure showing each level or floor and all bedrooms.
c. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located, the following standards must be met:
1. The four-family dwelling must meet all yard and height requirements of the zone in which it is located.
2. A minimum of one off-street parking space for each bedroom is required.
d. Permitting.
1. Applications meeting the standards listed in subsection (h)(1)(c) of this section are permitted through the zoning permit process listed in KGBC 18.90.020.
2. Applications that do not meet the standards listed in subsection (h)(1)(c) of this section are permitted through the conditional use permit process in KGBC 18.90.040(c).
(i) “G” Uses. Reserved.
(j) “H” Uses.
(1) Home Occupations.
a. It is the intent of this subsection to permit home occupations which are compatible with other permitted uses and with the residential character of a neighborhood, and which are clearly secondary or incidental to the residential use of the property. In general, a home occupation is an accessory use so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence other than for a sign as permitted in Chapter 18.80 KGBC.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.020, the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (j)(1)(d) of this section are met:
1. A floor plan of the home or other building indicating the areas to be used for the home occupation.
2. A copy of the State of Alaska business license for the business.
c. Uses Prohibited. Any use, including those shown in KGBC 18.50.010(f) as being permittable under this subsection, not meeting the development requirements of this subsection is prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Any occupation requiring a State of Alaska marijuana handler’s permit;
2. Any business activity where merchandise is placed on display for retail sale to the general public;
3. Commercial automotive and boat sales or repair;
4. Convalescent homes for the care of more than two patients;
5. Marijuana establishments;
6. Mortuaries;
7. Private schools with organized classes;
8. Real estate offices;
9. Restaurants.
d. Development Requirements. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located, the following standards must be met:
1. Not more than one person outside the family shall be employed in the home occupation.
2. Not more than one room or 30 percent of the gross floor area of all buildings on the lot, whichever is less, shall be used for the home occupation.
3. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal building, or other buildings which are accessory thereto. Any building used for a home occupation shall be wholly enclosed.
4. The home occupation shall be conducted at the home the business owner occupies.
5. There shall be no exterior sign, storage, display or other evidence of the home occupation or variance from the residential character of the principal building except for the sign permitted in Chapter 18.80 KGBC.
(k) “I” Uses. Reserved.
(l) “J” Uses. Reserved.
(m) “K” Uses. Reserved.
(n) “L” Uses. Reserved.
(o) “M” Uses.
(1) Marijuana Establishments.
a. It is the intent of this subsection to permit marijuana business establishments, excluding marijuana testing facilities, with a zoning permit only if the use meets specific criteria designed to make the use compatible with surrounding properties and maintain the neighborhood character, and to support compliance with State licensing requirements. Notice of the zoning permit application shall be mailed to owners of affected lots and owners of property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, 1,000 feet from any point on the outside perimeter of the subject property.
b. Application. The following application requirements are in addition to the application requirements in KGBC 18.90.020. Zoning permit applications for a marijuana business establishment use must include the information required to be submitted with an application for a State license under AS 17.38 and any other information required to determine whether the application meets the standards set out in this subsection. This information shall include, as applicable, but is not limited to:
1. A map showing all properties within 1,000 feet of the proposed location that identifies any features necessary to establish compliance with subsection (o)(1)(c) of this section, and permitting status as contained in subsection (o)(1)(d) of this section; and
2. A plan for testing in accordance with 3 AAC 306; and
3. A plan for waste disposal in accordance with 3 AAC 306; and
4. A plan for local transportation in accordance with 3 AAC 306; and
5. A plan for odor control in accordance with 3 AAC 306; and
6. A plan for security and surveillance of premises in accordance with 3 AAC 306; and
7. Plans associated with on-site consumption in accordance with 3 AAC 306; and
8. Such other information as the zoning official may require.
c. Development Standards.
1. A zoning permit shall not be issued to any marijuana business establishment, excluding marijuana testing facilities, if it is proposed to be located:
i. On any submerged lands or on a floating vessel; or
ii. On property located within 500 feet of a school ground; or
iii. On property located within 500 feet of a recreation or youth center; or
iv. Within 500 feet of a building in which religious services are regularly conducted; or
v. Within 500 feet of a correctional facility.
d. Uses that are proposed in locations identified in this subsection can only be allowed by a conditional use permit granted by the planning commission under the procedures listed in KGBC 18.50.030(o)(1). This includes locations where:
1. Any of the exterior walls of the building in which the use occurs are less than 200 feet from any residential zoning boundary.
2. Any of the exterior walls of the building in which the use occurs are more than 500 feet but less than 1,000 feet from any property line of a parcel of land containing a school.
3. Any of the exterior walls of the building in which the use occurs are more than 500 feet but less than 1,000 feet from any property line of a parcel of land containing a recreation or youth center.
e. The distances specified in subsections (o)(1)(c) and (d) of this section shall be measured by the shortest pedestrian route from the public entrance of the building in which the licensed premises would be located to the outer boundaries of the school grounds, the outer boundaries of the recreation or youth center, the main public entrance of the building in which religious services are regularly conducted, or the main public entrance of the correctional facility.
f. In addition to any conditions required by the zoning official for a zoning permit, or the planning commission for a conditional use permit, all zoning permits for marijuana establishments shall include the following conditions:
1. The permittee shall comply with the State regulations regarding that enterprise; and
2. The permittee shall maintain a current State license for the enterprise; and
3. The permittee shall comply with all the terms of their State license.
g. A zoning permit application shall be denied if the zoning official determines, based upon the information provided, that:
1. The application fails to contain the information required in subsection (o)(1)(b) of this subsection; or
2. The location and operation fails to meet the requirements of subsection (o)(1)(c) of this section; or
3. The proposed use would violate State licensing requirements.
h. Variances to Special Standards. The special standards listed in this subsection represent the minimum requirements necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough. As such, these standards cannot be reduced and are not subject to the provisions of KGBC 18.90.030.
i. Duration. A zoning permit for a marijuana establishment expires upon the expiration date of the State of Alaska Marijuana Establishment License issued for the use the zoning permit was issued for.
(p) “N” Uses. Reserved.
(q) “O” Uses. Reserved.
(r) “P” Uses. Reserved.
(s) “Q” Uses. Reserved.
(t) “R” Uses. Reserved.
(u) “S” Uses.
(1) Short-Term Rentals.
a. Intent. To provide the owner of a dwelling unit the opportunity to take advantage of the demand for short term housing by visitors, temporary workers, and others seeking an experience that is different from that provided by more traditional institutions such as hotels and motels.
b. Application. As contained in KGBC 18.90.020.
c. Development Standards.
1. Parking: One parking space per short-term rental.
2. Signage: Signage shall be subject to the requirements of the zoning district the use is located in.
(v) “T” Uses.
(1) Temporary Uses.
a. Intent. Allowing specific uses to be placed temporarily facilitates property development and construction projects, while other specific uses increase enjoyment of holidays and other special events.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.020, the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (v)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. A detailed, complete written description of anticipated events directly related to the activity proposed;
2. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing lot dimensions, location and dimension of existing buildings, location and dimension of proposed temporary buildings or uses with dimensions to property lines, and the location of adjacent rights-of-way and proposed off-street parking areas with the number of available spaces clearly marked; and
3. In the case of mobile buildings for use as construction and material storage, a copy of the approved zoning permit for development of the site.
c. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located, the following standards must be met:
1. The following temporary uses are allowed in any zoning district in conformance with the following standards:
i. Mobile buildings, trailers, and other temporary structures for use as construction offices, equipment and material storage during property development not lasting more than 12 months; and provided, that no dwelling use is allowed.
ii. Mobile buildings, trailers, and other temporary structures for festivals, carnivals, Christmas tree lots, and other similar uses lasting more than five days, but not lasting more than 30 days.
2. The following temporary uses are allowed in commercial, industrial, and PLI zones in conformance with the following standards:
i. The temporary use of private or public land for commercial activity such as Christmas tree sales, festivals, carnivals, merchandise or produce sales, and other similar uses lasting more than five days, but not lasting more than 30 days.
d. No other use, regardless of proposed or actual duration, may be permitted under this section.
(2) Townhouse Dwellings and Accessory Uses.
a. Intent. Townhouse dwellings can be constructed at a lower cost than a comparable single-family dwelling because the developer can take advantage of economies of scale. The result is a home that is more affordable and provides the benefits that arise from being part of a community. Special considerations are appropriate for this type of development due to the need to clearly identify responsibility for common elements of the structure such as common walls and roofing, as well as ensuring the property line separating the units falls in the center of the common walls.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.020, the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (v)(2)(c) of this section are met:
1. A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, or an agreement, as determined by the zoning official, regarding maintenance and other matters, shall, if new lots are created, be submitted with the preliminary plat in accordance with KGBC 17.35.010(e), and be submitted with the zoning permit application if no new lots are to be created. Such declaration or agreement shall be in such form as required by the zoning official, and shall include, but not be limited to, provisions providing for the maintenance and repair of the common wall and for decoration and maintenance of the exterior, including the roof, of the attached townhouse dwelling unit. The declaration or agreement shall be recorded.
2. An application for approval of a preliminary plat for subdivision shall be filed concurrently with the zoning permit application for construction of the series of attached townhouse dwelling units if new lots are to be created. Approval of the final subdivision plat shall not be granted until construction of the attached townhouse dwelling units has been completed.
c. Development Standards.
1. No series of lots shall contain more than eight contiguous townhouse dwelling units.
2. Title to all lots proposed to be developed with a series of attached townhouse dwelling units shall be vested under the same ownership at the time of construction, and all attached townhouse dwellings shall be constructed as a single unit and project during the same construction period.
3. In the event any townhouse unit is damaged or destroyed, any reconstruction or repair thereof shall comply with all the locational and other requirements set forth in this section.
d. Development Requirements Table. The following table provides the development requirements for townhouse dwellings. This table also provides special requirements and exceptions for development.

Development Requirement | End Lots | Non- End Lots

Development Requirement | End Lots | Non- End Lots
Lot Area | 2,500 sq. ft. | 2,000 sq. ft.
Lot Width 4 | 30 ft. | 24 ft.
Front Yard 6 | 10 ft. | 10 ft.
Side Yard 6 | 5 ft. 1 , 3 | 0 ft. 5 , 7
Rear Yard 6 | 15 ft. | 15 ft.
Maximum Lot Coverage | 50% | 60%
Maximum Structure Height 2 | 30 ft. | 30 ft.

1One side yard shall be zero feet, provided a common wall is located on such zero setback lot line; the remaining side yard shall be five feet.
2Measured as prescribed under definitions for maximum structure height or maximum building height and grade as applicable.
3One side wall of the townhouse dwelling shall be located along the zero-setback lot line, and this wall shall be shared in common with an attached similar townhouse dwelling unit. Each common wall shall have a minimum fire rating of two hours.
4At the front building line.
5Both side yards may be zero feet, provided the side yard setback on both abutting lots is also zero feet, and a common wall is located on each zero-setback line.
6No portion of any townhouse dwelling unit shall project over any lot line.
7Both side walls of each townhouse dwelling unit shall be located along a zero-setback side yard lot line, and each wall shall be shared in common with an attached similar townhouse dwelling unit.
(3) Triplex Dwellings.
a. Intent. To provide a land owner the opportunity to develop their land with a building to act as multigenerational housing or generate rental income.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.020, the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (v)(3)(c) of this section are met:
1. A floor plan of the structure showing each level or floor and all bedrooms.
c. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located, the following standards must be met:
1. The triplex must meet all yard and height requirements of the zone in which it is located.
2. A minimum of one off-street parking space for each bedroom is required.
d. Permitting.
1. Applications meeting the standards listed in subsection (v)(3)(c) of this section are permitted through the zoning permit process listed in KGBC 18.90.020.
2. Applications that do not meet the standards listed in subsection (v)(3)(c) of this section are permitted through the conditional use permit process listed in KGBC 18.90.040(c).
(4) Twinhouse Dwellings.
a. Intent. Twinhouse dwellings can be constructed at a lower cost than a comparable single-family dwelling because the developer can take advantage of economies of scale. The result is a home that is more affordable. Special considerations are appropriate for this type of development due to the need to clearly identify responsibility for common elements of the structure such as the common wall and roofing, as well as ensuring the property line separating the units falls in the center of the common wall.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.020, the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (v)(4)(c) of this section are met:
1. A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, or an agreement, as determined by the zoning official, regarding maintenance and other matters, shall, if new lots are created, be submitted with the preliminary plat in accordance with KGBC 17.35.010(e), and be submitted with the zoning permit application if no new lots are to be created. Such declaration or agreement shall be in such form as required by the zoning official, and shall include, but not be limited to, provisions providing for the maintenance and repair of the common wall and for decoration and maintenance of the exterior, including the roof, of the twinhouse dwelling unit. The declaration or agreement shall be recorded.
2. An application for approval of a preliminary plat for subdivision shall be filed concurrently with the zoning permit application for construction of the twinhouse dwelling unit if new lots are to be created. Approval of the final subdivision plat shall not be granted until construction of the twinhouse dwelling unit has been completed.
c. Development Standards.
1. Title to all lots proposed to be developed with twinhouse dwelling units shall be vested under the same ownership at the time of construction, and the twinhouse dwelling shall be constructed as a single unit and project during the same construction period.
2. In the event any twinhouse unit is damaged or destroyed, any reconstruction or repair thereof shall comply with all the locational and other requirements set forth in this section.
d. Development Requirements Table. The following table provides the development requirements for twinhouse dwellings. This table also provides special requirements and exceptions for development.

Zone | Minimum Lot Area 2 | Minimum Lot Width 3 | Minimum Yards 1 , 4 , 5

Zone | Minimum Lot Area 2 | Minimum Lot Width 3 | Minimum Yards 1 , 4 , 5
FY = Front Yard SY = Side Yard RY = Rear Yard
RS | 12,500 sq. ft. | 45 ft. | FY = 15 ft. SY = 15 ft. RY = 20 ft.
RL | 7,500 sq. ft. | 40 ft. | FY = 15 ft. SY = 15 ft. RY = 20 ft.
RN | 5,000 sq. ft. | 35 ft. | FY = 15 ft. SY = 10 ft. RY = 20 ft.
RM | 2,500 sq. ft. | 30 ft. | FY = 10 ft. SY = 5 ft. RY = 15 ft.
RH | 2,500 sq. ft. | 30 ft. | FY = 10 ft. SY = 5 ft. RY = 5 ft.

1One side yard shall be zero feet.
2The minimum lot area of a lot upon which is located one twinhouse dwelling may be reduced by not more than 20 percent if such lot reduction is necessary for optimal building siting due to lot configuration, view considerations, steep slopes, rock outcroppings, drainage courses, or other natural topographical features located on or adjacent to the lot proposed for twinhouse development, as determined by the planning commission serving as the platting authority, and provided such lot configuration, view considerations, steep slopes, rock outcroppings or other natural topographic features shall be clearly indicated on the subdivision plat. Any reduction in the minimum lot size of one twinhouse dwelling unit lot must be compensated for by an equal increase in the lot size of the lot upon which the attached companion twinhouse dwelling unit is to be located. In no event shall the combined area of the two lots upon which the two attached twinhouse dwelling units are to be located be less than the minimum lot area required by the zoning district within which the property is located. Additionally, all setback requirements specified in this chapter shall be met in all cases.
3At the front building line.
4One twinhouse dwelling unit side wall shall be located along the zero-setback lot line, and this wall shall be shared as a common wall with an attached similar twinhouse dwelling unit. The common wall shall have a minimum fire rating of two hours.
5No portion of the twinhouse dwelling unit shall project over any lot line.
(w) “U” Uses. Reserved.
(x) “V” Uses. Reserved.
(y) “W” Uses. Reserved.
(z) “X” Uses. Reserved.
(aa) “Y” Uses. Reserved.
(bb) “Z” Uses. Reserved.


18.50.030 Conditional use standards.

(a) Specific Uses. In addition to the normal planning commission review of a conditional use permit, some requests include specific standards associated with the proposed use. These specific standards are included in order to lessen the impacts of the proposed use. In addition to meeting the specific conditional use standards listed within this chapter for the particular use, the proposed use must meet all other requirements of the KGBC. In the event of a conflict between the specific standards listed and the other zoning requirements of this title, the specific standard shall prevail.
(b) Organization. For each of the specific uses contained in this chapter the following information is provided:
(1) Intent. The intent statement is designed to provide an understanding of the benefits and challenges that may accrue from allowing the use, as well as the overall reasoning behind each subsection.
(2) Application. The application requirements are in addition to the application requirements of KGBC 18.90.040(c).
(3) Review Standards. The standards against which an application must be evaluated by the planning commission are in addition to the requirements of KGBC 18.90.040(c).
(4) Development Standards. Some conditional uses have development requirements that are specific to the use. These development requirements are in addition to the development requirements of the zone in which the use is located, and any conditions included in the planning commission resolution authorizing the use.
(c) “A” Uses. Reserved.
(d) “B” Uses. Reserved.
(e) “C” Uses.
(1) In all zones where commercial shopping centers are permitted as a conditional use, they may be permitted by the planning commission as conditional uses under the procedure specified in this chapter and KGBC 18.90.040(c).
a. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required:
1. A complete and detailed site plan of the proposed development, including a general description of the goods and services which the development would offer for sale;
2. A description of any additional developments which the applicant intends to or reasonably anticipates in conjunction with or subsequent to the proposed development on the same or adjoining parcels;
3. A traffic impact analysis and detailed transportation management plan which describes the projected traffic impact of the proposed project, including average daily and peak hour volumes, sight distances, street capacity, Transportation Research Board Highway Capacity Manual (2010) (HCM) level of service, number and location of driveways and intersections, average and peak speeds, pedestrian movement, and traffic controls required to meet HCM service level C or better on affected streets;
4. An estimate of the number and types of jobs to be created by the project;
5. A detailed description of the project’s public service and utility requirements including water supply, sewage and solid waste disposal, electrical, cable, telephone and emergency services;
6. A projection of local sales and property tax revenue the project is expected to generate assuming current tax structures and rates remain in effect;
7. The developer shall also provide a report addressing the development’s anticipated impacts on the following:
i. Outstanding bonds and publicly financed projects;
ii. The cost of public services and public revenue provided through taxes or other income.
b. Development Requirements. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. The commercial shopping center must be planned and developed as a unit. This requirement is not intended to preclude separate ownership of stores, but rather to achieve efficiencies of a compact development and joint use of parking, exits and entrances, and landscaped areas.
2. The off-street parking requirements within the applicable zone chapter must be met.
(f) “D” Uses. Reserved.
(g) “E” Uses. Reserved.
(h) “F” Uses. Reserved.
(i) “G” Uses. Reserved.
(j) “H” Uses.
(1) Hot-Mix Asphalt Plants and Concrete Batch Plants, Related Machinery and Materials, and Stockpiling and Storage of Related Materials and Machinery.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to facilitate the construction of roads and the development of public and private properties by allowing the manufacture of asphalt and concrete to occur in any zoning district where a construction project calls for close proximity to a source of concrete or asphalt.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (j)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. Certifications or other evidence that the machinery to be used meets the standards set by the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation for such machinery.
2. The site plan shall indicate the location and types of materials to be stored.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c) the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The machinery and equipment proposed to be used meets the requirements and standards of the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation;
2. Such machinery and equipment is used and operated in such a manner as to comply with the requirements and standards of the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation, the several agencies and departments of the United States of America having jurisdiction thereover, other State or local requirements and standards, the provisions of State law and city and borough ordinances and the common law of the State;
3. Such conditional use is compatible with the use to which adjacent property or properties are being put at the time of the application for such conditional use.
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. Materials that pose a nuisance or hazard due to flammability, volatility, or corrosiveness shall be stored as far from surrounding development as practical.
2. Material transport to and from the site shall be conducted in such manner as to minimize the impact to surrounding properties from noise, dust, smoke, and odor.
3. Hot-mix asphalt plants and concrete batch plants may be temporarily erected and used in any district, and in conjunction therewith may be stored and stockpiled, for a period not to exceed 12 months.
4. The applicant requesting such a conditional use supplies to the planning commission a bond in the penal amount of $10,000, written by an agent duly authorized to write such bonds in the State, in a form satisfactory to the borough attorney, conditioned as hereinabove provided.
(k) “I” Uses. Reserved.
(l) “J” Uses. Reserved.
(m) “K” Uses.
(1) Kennels, Boarding or as Accessory to a Veterinary Clinic.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to allow for the care and boarding of domestic animals during times when their owners are not able to care for them due to travel or other circumstances. The boarding of domestic animals can present unique challenges to compatibility with surrounding properties due to noise, odor, and sanitation. The review and development standards contained herein are intended to protect the quiet enjoyment of surrounding properties through the mitigation of anticipated impacts.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (m)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. A description of the kennel floor construction or covering that explains its resistance to seepage.
2. A drawing of the perimeter fence with details to indicate its resistance to escape or injury.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c) the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The interior surface proposed for any structure within which the kennel will be contained is impervious to the seepage of liquids from the interior to the exterior of the structure.
2. The six-foot-high safety fence proposed for installation around the entire perimeter of the kennel area is designed to prevent escape or injury.
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. An animal establishment permit shall be obtained from the Ketchikan Gateway Borough department of animal protection, subject to the requirements listed in KGBC 6.10.050.
2. The distance from any building containing kennels to the nearest adjoining residentially zoned property shall be not less than 50 feet.
3. Fifty-foot setbacks shall be provided from all property lines.
4. Any structure within which the kennel is located shall be wholly enclosed.
5. The facility’s disposal system shall be approved by the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.
6. Any structure within which the kennel is contained shall provide an interior surface that is impervious to the seepage of liquids from the interior to the exterior of the structure.
7. A six-foot-high safety fence, designed to prevent escape or injury, shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the kennel area.
(2) Kennels, Residential.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to allow kennels to be located in residential areas in such a manner that, under normal operating conditions, the kennel will be indistinguishable from surrounding properties with regard to noise, and will provide for the safety of the animals housed therein and neighboring property owners from escape.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (m)(2)(c) of this section are met:
1. The site plan shall indicate the location of the kennel, all associated buildings, regardless of size, the fencing around any outdoor areas, and the home to which the kennel is accessory.
2. The materials and coatings or coverings from which the kennel floor will be made.
3. A certificate from a professional civil engineer licensed to do business in the State of Alaska stating that the building(s) in which the kennel will be located is designed in such manner so as to dissipate an interior sound level of 110 dBA (110 decibels on the A-weighted sound level) down to an exterior sound level of 45 dBA at a point located 50 feet from the exterior of the structure.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c) the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The use shall be accessory to a residential use.
2. The interior surface proposed for any structure within which the kennel will be contained is impervious to the seepage of liquids from the interior to the exterior of the structure.
3. Any structure within which the kennel is located shall be constructed, or reconstructed, in such manner so as to dissipate an interior sound level of 110 dBA (110 decibels on the A-weighted sound level) down to an exterior sound level of 45 dBA at a point located 50 feet from the exterior of the kennel structure.
4. The six-foot-high safety fence proposed for installation around the entire perimeter of the kennel area is designed to prevent escape or injury.
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. An animal establishment permit shall be obtained from the Ketchikan Gateway Borough department of animal protection, subject to the requirements listed in KGBC 6.10.050.
2. Fifty-foot setbacks shall be provided from all property lines.
3. Any structure within which the kennel is located shall be wholly enclosed.
4. The facility’s waste disposal system shall be approved by the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.
5. Any structure within which the kennel is located shall be constructed, or reconstructed, in such manner so as to dissipate an interior sound level of 110 dBA (110 decibels on the A-weighted sound level) down to an exterior sound level of 45 dBA at a point located 50 feet from the exterior of the kennel structure. The structure shall be certified as meeting these requirements by a registered professional civil engineer.
6. Any structure within which the kennel is contained shall provide an interior surface that is impervious to the seepage of liquids from the interior to the exterior of the structure.
7. A six-foot-high safety fence, designed to prevent escape or injury, shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the kennel area.
8. There shall be no exterior sign, storage, display or other evidence of the presence of a residential kennel on the premises or any visual variance from the residential character of the principal building except for the sign as permitted in Chapter 18.80 KGBC.
(n) “L” Uses. Reserved.
(o) “M” Uses.
(1) Marijuana Business Establishments.
a. Intent. Marijuana business establishments can have negative impacts including odor, traffic, and noise that are not fully addressed through State licensing. This subsection is designed to make these uses compatible with surrounding properties, maintain the neighborhood character, and to support compliance with State licensing requirements.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (o)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. A complete application for a zoning permit as contained in KGBC 18.50.020(o)(1)(b).
2. Such other information as the zoning official may require.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c) the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The use is not located on any submerged lands or on a floating vessel; or
2. Is not located on property located within 500 feet of a school ground; or
3. The use is not located on property located within 500 feet of a recreation or youth center; or
4. The use is not located within 500 feet of a building in which religious services are regularly conducted; or
5. The use is not located within 500 feet of a correctional facility; or
6. The proposed use would not, through location, operation, or type, violate State licensing requirements.
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. The permittee shall comply with the State regulations regarding that enterprise; and
2. The permittee shall maintain a current State license for the enterprise; and
3. The permittee shall comply with all the terms of their State license.
e. Duration. A conditional use permit for a marijuana establishment expires upon the expiration date of the State of Alaska Marijuana Establishment License issued for the use the conditional use permit was granted for.
(2) Manufacturing, Light Manufacturing, Fabricating, Assembling, Enclosed Storage and Repair Activities Including Automotive Repair.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to allow manufacturing, storage, and repair uses that are generally reserved for industrial zones to be permitted in commercial zones if, through operation, type, and location, the use is compatible with neighboring uses and will maintain the neighborhood character.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (o)(2)(c) of this section are met:
1. A description of the types and sources of noise the use will generate.
2. A description of the electrical interference the use will generate.
3. The site plan shall indicate the location of any outdoor lighting and the radius of the glare it will produce.
4. The site plan shall indicate where arc welding, acetylene torch cutting and similar processes will be performed.
5. A listing and quantities of any flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases and explosives to be handled or stored on the property.
6. The location and purpose of enameling and paint-spraying operations.
7. A description of the types and sources of vibration the use will generate.
8. A description of the types and sources of odor the use will generate.
9. A description of the sources of dust and smoke the use will generate.
10. The site plan shall indicate the location of any view-obscuring fencing required for open storage. A rendering of the fencing shall also be attached.
11. The location, width, and surfacing of any interior roadways that provide access to combustible materials to be stored on the property.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c) the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. Surrounding properties will not be subject to nuisances beyond those typical of principal uses as a result of:
i. Noise;
ii. Glare;
iii. Odor;
iv. Vibration.
2. Surrounding properties will not be at a greater risk of damage or injury than those typical of principal uses as a result of:
i. Hazardous substances;
ii. Dust and smoke;
iii. Vapors;
iv. Visible, ultraviolet, and infrared radiation.
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. Noise Limitation. The noise emanating from the use of property shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness. The maximum permissible sound pressure level, measured at the boundary line between the IL zone and any residential zone, shall be no greater than the following between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.:

Frequency Band Cycles per Second | Sound Pressure Level Decibels RE 0.0002 Dynes/cm 2

Frequency Band Cycles per Second | Sound Pressure Level Decibels RE 0.0002 Dynes/cm 2
20 – 75 | 69
75 – 150 | 54
150 – 300 | 47
300 – 600 | 41
600 – 1,200 | 37
1,200 – 2,400 | 34
2,400 – 4,800 | 31
4,800 – 10,000 | 28

During other hours each of the sound level measurements may be increased not to exceed 10 decibels over the above figures.
2. Electrical Interference. The proposed use or structure shall not interfere with electrical processes in nearby buildings or land uses.
3. Lighting. Any lighting shall not be used in a manner which produces glare on public highways and neighboring property. Arc welding, acetylene torch cutting and similar processes shall be performed so as not to be seen outside the property.
4. Fire and Safety Hazards. The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases and explosives shall comply with the fire prevention code and all other applicable laws and regulations. Enameling and paint-spraying operations shall be permitted when incidental to the principal use and when such operations are contained within a building of two-hour fire-resistive construction.
5. Vibration. Any machine or operation which causes a displacement exceeding one three-thousandth of one inch as measured at the property line is prohibited.
6. Odor. Uses causing the emission of obnoxious odors of any kind and the emission of any toxic or corrosive fumes or gases are prohibited.
7. Dust and Smoke. Dust and smoke created by industrial operations shall not be exhausted or wasted into the air in such a manner as to create a nuisance.
8. Open Storage. Any storage shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any street right-of-way. Any storage shall be enclosed with an eight-foot-high view-obscuring fence of good appearance acceptable to the planning commission. Whenever lumber, coal or other combustible material is stored, a roadway shall be provided, graded and maintained from the street to the rear of the property to permit free access for fire trucks at any time.
9. Shipping and Receiving. No shipping and receiving dock located within 100 feet of a residential district shall be operated between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
10. Residential Buffer. Whenever the property abuts or is separated by an alley from a residential zone, the use or building shall be screened by a sight-obscuring enclosure.
(3) Mobile Buildings – Generally.
a. Intent. Mobile buildings are commonly used as an economical solution when offices and secure storage are needed on construction sites, as habitation for employees and watchmen, and as individual homes. They provide benefits in the form of flexibility, and can be relocated to be close to the work. When the project is complete they can be removed with little trace they were ever there. They are necessarily built to be light, which places limits on the types of materials that can be used. The ability to transport them on the road system also places dimensional limits on their design. Accessory structures such as garages are typically not mobile and are thus either absent or tend to be hastily built. The limits on materials and dimensions, combined with nonpermanent accessory buildings leads to an aesthetic that is not generally in keeping with traditional stick frame structures. This aesthetic is generally accepted on a temporary basis, but less so as a permanent fixture to an area. The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate development by allowing mobile buildings on a temporary basis, and to provide provisions for their permanent placement upon completion of improvements to make them immobile.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (o)(3)(c) of this section are met:
1. Size, make and year of manufacture of the mobile building.
2. Purpose for which the mobile building will be used.
3. Expected duration the mobile building will be located on the parcel.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The mobile building will be placed for the minimum time necessary.
2. The mobile building is aesthetically compatible with surrounding properties through design, placement, or screening.
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. The undercarriage of a mobile building to be placed for more than six months shall be screened from view by skirting.
(4) Mobile Buildings – Mobile Building Parks.
a. Intent. Mobile building parks can provide an array of social benefits. The benefits generally accrue from the affordability the units offer, but proximity of units can also provide security. Since they are single story, they can be an appropriate housing choice for people who cannot negotiate stairs. Mobile buildings also make good housing options for workers involved in multi-year projects or temporary positions lasting more than a year. The purpose of this subsection is to provide protections for properties surrounding mobile building parks from impacts arising from aesthetic concerns, higher residential densities than in surrounding areas, traffic, and wastewater disposal. It is also intended to protect residents of the park by requiring road and drainage standards, building separations, and water supply and wastewater disposal standards, among others.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (o)(4)(c) of this section are met:
1. The number, location and size of all mobile building spaces, or campsites;
2. The location, width and surfacing of roadways, off-street parking and walkways;
3. The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures;
4. The methods and plans of water supply, surface drainage and sewage disposal;
5. The size and location of recreation areas;
6. General landscape and development plans in such detail as will enable the planning commission to determine whether or not the proposed park meets the design requirements of this chapter.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The density of dwelling units is appropriate for the location and surrounding area.
2. Connecting roadways have sufficient capacity.
3. The internal road design and configuration will provide adequate access to all units for both occupants and emergency services.
4. Internal roadways are integrated with public roads with regard to traffic volumes and sight distances.
5. The park is adequately screened from view by surrounding properties.
6. There is adequate water, sewer, power, and communications infrastructure to support the park.
7. Drainage facilities serving the park have sufficient capacity.
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. Mobile building parks shall have a density of not more than 10 mobile buildings per gross acre.
2. Direct access from any arterial public street or right-of-way to any mobile building space within a mobile building park shall not be permitted.
3. Private roads within a mobile building park shall have a minimum width of 20 feet of stabilized surface. Private roads within a mobile building park shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
4. One parking space shall be provided for each mobile building space either on the mobile building space or conveniently located in the general area within the mobile building park. Parking space shall be a minimum of 180 square feet and of suitable configuration.
5. For mobile building parks greater than 10 units separate facilities may be provided for laundry facilities and park management offices clearly accessory to residential uses.
6. The minimum area for spaces shall be 2,600 square feet for a mobile building space and 3,900 square feet for a sectional building space.
7. Each space shall have a mean width of not less than 30 feet for a mobile building space and not less than 45 feet for a sectional building space.
8. Spacing and Setbacks.
i. In a mobile building park, except for landscaping, fences and utility transmission lines, no mobile building or any structure shall be located within 20 feet of any property line of the mobile building park abutting a public street right-of-way, or within 15 feet of any side property line, or within 20 feet of any rear property line of the mobile building park.
ii. Within a mobile building space no mobile building, or its additions, or accessory structures shall be located within 10 feet of the front or within five feet of the side or rear boundary lines of the mobile building space.
iii. No mobile building, its additions or accessory structures shall be placed within 10 feet of any other mobile building, its additions or accessory structures.
9. A landscape screen consisting of view-obscuring fencing or vegetation shall be provided around mobile building parks except where, in the opinion of the planning commission, natural features such as tree cover or topography provide adequate screening or make other screening ineffective.
10. The undercarriage of each mobile building shall be screened from view by skirting.
11. Water supply and sewage disposal shall be provided by systems common to the entire mobile building park and in compliance with the applicable regulations of the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.
12. Mobile building parks shall be designed and developed to ensure rapid drainage of surface water.
13. Travel trailer spaces and campsites shall comply with all requirements of subsection (o)(5) of this section and shall in number not exceed 20 percent of the total number of mobile building spaces within the mobile building park.
14. Conditional Use Permit Duration.
i. Three years renewable.
ii. A perpetual conditional use permit may be granted for a mobile building park use after the expiration of at least two three-year conditional use permits and after an inspection during the last six months of the last three-year permit by the designated planning official for conformance with all the provisions of this title and with all the terms of approval under which the use operates.
(5) Mobile Buildings – Travel Trailer Parks.
a. Intent. Travel trailer parks provide opportunities for visitors and residents alike to partake in the natural beauty for which Ketchikan is known. The purpose of this subsection is to establish standards that protect nearby properties from impacts such as aesthetics, noise, smoke and odors, and traffic. It is also the intent to protect users of travel trailer parks by allowing travel trailer parks with road and building separation standards, water supply and wastewater disposal standards, among others.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (o)(5)(c) of this section are met:
1. The number, location and size of all mobile building spaces, or campsites;
2. The location, width and surfacing of roadways, off-street parking and walkways;
3. The location of service buildings and any other proposed structures;
4. The methods and plans of water supply, surface drainage and sewage disposal;
5. The size and location of recreation areas;
6. General landscape and development plans in such detail as will enable the planning commission to determine whether or not the proposed park meets the design requirements of this chapter.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The density of dwelling units is appropriate for the location and surrounding area.
2. Connecting roadways have sufficient capacity.
3. The internal road design and configuration will provide adequate access to all units for both occupants and emergency services, as well as providing maneuvering room for vehicles trailering travel trailers.
4. Internal roadways are integrated with public roads with regard to traffic volumes, sight distances, and vehicle size and length.
5. The park is adequately screened from view by surrounding properties.
6. There is adequate water, sewer, power, and communications infrastructure to support the park.
7. Drainage facilities serving the park have sufficient capacity.
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. Travel trailer parks shall have a density of not more than 19 campsites per gross acre.
2. Occupants of travel trailer park campsites shall remain in the same travel trailer park not more than 90 days in any calendar year.
3. Accessory structures and uses, such as boat rental facilities, laundry facilities, or bait shops, may be permitted; provided, that such structures or uses are clearly accessory to the recreational use of the park.
4. In a travel trailer park, except for landscaping, fences and utility transmission lines, no travel trailer or any structure shall be located within 20 feet of any property line of the travel trailer park abutting a public street right-of-way, or within 15 feet of any side property line, or within 20 feet of any rear property line of the travel trailer park.
5. Access.
i. Direct vehicular access from any public street to any campsite within a travel trailer park shall not be permitted.
ii. Adequate provision shall be made for safe turning movements of vehicles with trailers entering or leaving the travel trailer park.
iii. Internal roads and walkways shall be designed for safe and convenient access to individual campsites and to facilities for common use of park occupants.
iv. Internal roads within a travel trailer park shall have a minimum width of 12 feet of stabilized surface for one-way traffic and not less than 20 feet of stabilized surface for two-way traffic. A 20-foot minimum width access roadway shall be extended to within 150 feet of each campsite in the travel trailer park.
v. Pedestrian circulation shall be accommodated by walkways separate from vehicular roads wherever practicable.
6. Required Service Facilities.
i. All water supply and sewage disposal services shall be provided in compliance with all applicable regulations of the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.
ii. Adequate restroom facilities shall be located within 400 feet of any campsite, by normal pedestrian routes, and at the minimum there shall be one men’s and one women’s toilet and lavatory and one wastewater disposal sink for every 15 campsites.
iii. At least one sanitary station for the sole purpose of disposing of holding tank wastes shall be provided for every 100 or fewer travel trailer campsites.
7. Campsites.
i. Except as listed below, no minimum dimensions are specified for campsites, but each campsite shall provide a trailer stand and living area and may provide parking areas as needed, and the boundaries of the campsite shall be clearly marked.
ii. Stands for travel trailers and tow vehicles shall be stable and well-drained to prevent the accumulation of standing water or mud, and to prevent erosion of the stand.
iii. Cleared living areas shall be suitably located and improved for outdoor use by occupants of the campsite.
iv. Parking areas shall be a minimum of 180 square feet and of suitable configuration and shall be designed for the parking of vehicles other than the travel trailer or its tow vehicle.
v. Stands, living areas and parking areas of any campsite shall be separated a minimum of 10 feet from any park road or walkway and there shall be a minimum separation of 10 feet between campsite stands.
8. Conditional Use Permit Duration.
i. Three years renewable.
ii. A perpetual permit may be granted for a travel trailer park use after the expiration of at least two three-year conditional use permits and after an inspection during the last six months of the last three-year permit by the designated planning official for conformance with all the provisions of this title and with all the terms of approval under which the use operates.
(6) Mobile Buildings – Residences on Construction Sites.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to allow property owners use of a recreational vehicle or a travel trailer as a cost-effective technique for securing housing during active construction of a primary residence.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c) and the information required in subsection (o)(6)(c) of this section, the following information is required:
1. Evidence that approved utilities services are in place for the travel trailer or recreational vehicle.
2. A plan for discharging wastewater into a treatment and disposal facility approved by the Alaska Department of Conservation.
3. A valid zoning permit for the primary residence.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The mobile building will be placed for the minimum time necessary.
d. Development Standards.
1. Occupancy of the travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall be limited to the owner of the subject parcel.
2. Conditional use permit duration is one year during active construction of a principal residence, renewable for one year following expiration of the initial term.
3. The permit under this subsection may be revoked if active construction ceases for more than 30 consecutive days.
4. Residential use of the travel trailer or recreational vehicle shall cease upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy of a principal residence.
(7) Mobile Food Vendors.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to allow mobile food vendors to operate in commercial and industrial zones even if the property is covered by the Mobile Building Restricted overlay zone. Special consideration is warranted for this type of use because the mobile nature of the use requires self-sufficiency and does not require connections to water, sewer, power, and other infrastructure that brick and mortar restaurants benefit from. Mobile food vendors can also move from location to location making their impacts less predictable. The sources of impacts that are anticipated include queuing of patrons, garbage disposal, smoke and odors, wastewater disposal, and vehicular traffic.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (o)(7)(c) of this section are met:
1. A to-scale site plan showing the property where the mobile food vendor is proposed to be located; off-street parking areas; pedestrian or vehicular queuing areas; and outdoor seating or other areas to be occupied by customers.
2. A narrative description of the use explaining how it will not impact surrounding properties with noise, odor, lighting, parking, pedestrian or traffic circulation, trash, or wastewater disposal.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The mobile food vendor will not impact surrounding properties to any greater degree than a brick and mortar building put to the same use for:
i. Noise;
ii. Odor;
iii. Lighting;
iv. Pedestrian circulation;
v. Vehicular circulation;
vi. Solid waste;
vii. Wastewater disposal.
d. Development Standards. As contained in the zoning district the use is located in and any additional conditions placed by the planning commission.
e. Conditional use permit duration is three year renewable.
(8) Multifamily Group Housing.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to provide property owners with flexibility in establishing separate living quarters, that are designed for human habitation but do not meet the definition of a dwelling unit because certain elements are missing, on a single property so they might obtain companionship, security, or other benefits.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (o)(8)(c) of this section are met:
1. The site plan shall indicate the location of all housing units, the number of housing units in each building, and the location of all buildings to be used as common areas.
2. A floor plan for each building intended for human occupation.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. The site must be at least one acre in area.
2. The proposed dwelling group will constitute a residential area of sustained desirability and stability, will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and will not adversely affect surrounding property values.
d. Development Requirements. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. An area of at least 7,500 square feet per housing unit shall be provided.
2. Yard, coverage and height requirements shall be the same as for principal uses in this zone.
3. Water and sewer facilities shall be acceptable to all applicable health regulations.
(p) “N” Uses.
(1) Natural Resource Extraction.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to allow for and regulate the operation, scope, and duration of natural resource extraction within the borough, meeting the following objectives:
1. Provide landowners flexibility in realizing the economic value of their property by allowing the commercial extraction of natural resources in connection with the development of parcels for uses permitted in the relevant zone;
2. Minimize adverse impacts on other properties in the area, including, but not limited to, dust, noise, vibration, light, drainage changes and other off-site impacts, through careful design, establishing reasonable standards for equipment operation, and placing appropriate limits on the duration of activities;
3. Ensure that activities can be supported by existing infrastructure of the adjacent area.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (p)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. A site plan of the subject parcel showing:
i. The limits of extraction or timber harvest;
ii. The egress points for the operation;
iii. The location where processing equipment will be operated;
iv. The location where extracted materials will be stored or stockpiled;
v. The location of roads to be constructed;
vi. The location of any helicopter landing pads;
vii. The location of existing and proposed buildings;
viii. The location of any streams or drainages and where they will be relocated;
ix. The location of any mitigation measures such as buffers, sediment traps, retention ponds, or noise barriers;
x. A drainage or excavation plan if necessary.
2. A map of the subject parcel and surrounding area showing:
i. Topography;
ii. Land, air, and marine transport corridors to and from the subject parcel;
iii. Uses adjacent to the subject parcel and transport corridors.
3. A narrative description of the operation to include:
i. The estimated duration of extraction activities;
ii. The estimated dates activities will occur;
iii. The estimated volume of material to be extracted;
iv. The methods to be used to extract materials;
v. The methods to be used to process materials;
vi. The estimated duration that stockpiled materials will be removed from the property;
vii. Any State or federal permits needed to conduct the proposed activity.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. Activity Impact Minimized. Extraction, processing, and transport activities are conducted in such a way as to limit and mitigate adverse impacts from noise, dust, drainage changes, smoke, vibration, flyrock, and lighting on surrounding uses.
2. Collateral Impacts. Extraction activities should not result in neighboring properties being at increased risk of landslide or impacts from redirected drainage and/or excavation.
3. Final Land Status. When complete, the extraction operations will not make the subject parcel unsuitable for future development as a result of such conditions as improper fill, steep or unstable slopes, or redirected drainage.
d. Development Standards. As contained in the zoning district the use is located in and any additional conditions placed by the planning commission.
e. Conditional use permit duration is three years with one renewal.
(q) “O” Uses. Reserved.
(r) “P” Uses.
(1) Public and Private Off-Street Parking Lots, Drive-In Businesses, Gasoline Service Stations, and Auto Sales Agencies.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to allow vehicle-based businesses that occupy relatively large areas of land to be located in the downtown core in such a manner that the concentrated retail environment and pedestrian traffic flow businesses rely on will not be interrupted.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (r)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. The site plan shall indicate the location of all vehicular entrance and egress points.
2. A map of the area surrounding the proposed location with the names and types of business labeled, the location of the businesses, and the location of all sidewalks and crosswalks.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. That exits and entrances be located to prevent traffic congestion and hazards;
2. That the proposed use be located so it will not divide the concentrated pedestrian shopping area which is intended for this zone.
d. Development Standards. As contained in the zoning district the use is located in and any additional conditions placed by the planning commission.
(s) “Q” Uses. Reserved.
(t) “R” Uses. Reserved.
(u) “S” Uses.
(1) Shooting Facilities.
a. Intent. Hunting is an integral part of many Ketchikan residents’ lifestyles. As such, facilities that allow for practice with, and education about, firearms, archery, or any other device that propels projectiles over long distances and high speed are an important component of that lifestyle. Without such facilities, areas where shooting may not be desirable will be used as such. In other communities shooting facilities are relegated to areas where large swaths of undeveloped land are available. Ketchikan does not benefit from such areas, so this subsection was written to provide a framework by which the design and placement of shooting facilities can be regulated so as to protect the public from injury and nuisance while maintaining convenient access for users.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (u)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. Site plan and narrative to determine compliance with the specific CUP standards.
2. Site plan showing layout of facility.
3. Safety and security measures.
4. Vicinity map showing:
i. Proximity to development;
ii. Topographic and vegetative features.
5. Narrative and diagrammatic description to demonstrate compliance with the safety design standards of the Department of Energy or a nationally recognized organization such as the National Rifle Association, the National Skeet Shooting Association, the National Sport Shooting Association, the National Field Archery Association, or the International Bow Hunting Organization.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the planning commission must find that the physical and operational design of the shooting facility meets the following criteria by:
1. Containing projectiles to the property; and
2. Minimizing the chances that surrounding properties could be impacted by stray projectiles; and
3. Limiting noise impacts on surrounding properties; and
4. Preventing unauthorized access that could result in injury.
d. Development Standards. In addition to any conditions required by the planning commission for conditional use permit, all conditional use permits for shooting facilities shall include the following conditions:
1. Exploding targets, such as Tannerite, are not allowed.
2. Items used for targets shall comply with the safety design standards of the Department of Energy or a nationally recognized organization such as the National Rifle Association, the National Skeet Shooting Association, the National Sport Shooting Association, the National Field Archery Association, or the International Bow Hunting Organization.
3. An employee of the shooting facility shall be on location to monitor shooting activities during all times that the range is open.
4. The shooting facility shall maintain insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate.
5. Weapons with a range or power in excess of the safety design of the shooting facility are prohibited.
(v) “T” Uses.
(1) Tax-Exempt Uses.
a. Intent. The purpose of this subsection is to allow nongovernmental agencies providing services typically provided by governments to use lands for purposes typically reserved for commercial, industrial, or institutional zones on any property. The purpose of this allowance is to facilitate the provision of services that benefit the general public welfare, but in a manner that protects or enhances the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (v)(1)(c) of this section are met:
1. A description of the services to be provided by the use, an estimate of the number of people currently in need of the services, and a projection of the need for the services into the future.
2. An assessment of the level to which the proposed use will meet current and future demands for the services.
3. The reasoning behind the proposed location, including any other locations that were considered.
4. The site plan shall clearly show all pedestrian and vehicular entrances and exits.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. That the proposed location of the tax-exempt use and the size and the characteristics of the site will maximize its benefit to the public.
2. That the proposed location of the tax-exempt use and the plan for entrances and exits will not create traffic hazards on public streets.
3. That the proposed tax-exempt use will not occupy land which would be more beneficial to the community if put to a different use.
4. That the proposed use will not be detrimental to principal uses permitted in the zone for which the conditional use permit is requested.
d. Development Requirements. As contained in the zoning district the use is located in and any additional conditions placed by the planning commission.
e. Exception. A proposed borough use of borough-owned property does not require a conditional use permit under this subsection if the assembly, by motion or resolution, approves a finding that the proposed project is in the public interest. An exemption based on such a finding will not waive the need for a conditional use permit where a conditional use permit is otherwise required by another section of this title.
(2) Telecommunications Facilities.
a. Intent. The purpose of this conditional use permit is to allow for and regulate the design, location, placement, construction, and removal of telecommunications towers, facilities, and antennas within the borough, meeting the following objectives:
1. Facilitate the provision of telecommunications services to the residents and businesses of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough and city of Ketchikan in an orderly fashion;
2. Minimize adverse impacts of towers through careful design, site location, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
3. Ensure that towers, antennas, and telecommunications facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses;
4. Promote and encourage shared use/co-location of towers and antenna support structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and
5. To encourage the location of towers in industrial and commercial districts and undeveloped areas rather than residential areas.
b. Application. In addition to the application requirements contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the following information is required to provide evidence that the standards contained in subsection (v)(2)(c) of this section are met:
1. A report from a registered professional engineer which:
i. Describes the tower height and design, including a cross section and elevation;
ii. Certifies the transmission facility’s compliance with structural and electrical standards;
iii. Describes the tower’s capacity, including the potential numbers and type of antennas or generators that it can accommodate;
iv. Describes the lighting to be placed on the tower if required by the FCC or FAA;
v. Certifies that the transmission facility will not cause destructive interference with previously established public safety communications systems; and
vi. Describes how the requirements and standards of the ordinance codified in this subsection will be met by the proposed transmission facility and all FCC and FAA regulations are met;
2. A site plan, including a description of the lot lines, setbacks, location and use of adjacent structures, proposed location of the tower and other facilities, distance between facilities, landscaping, screening, access, parking, and security;
3. Demonstration of Need. The applicant shall provide an analysis prepared by a radio or electrical engineer demonstrating that the proposed location of the antennas is necessary to meet the coverage and capacity needs of its system and that there is no existing antenna support structure that could adequately serve the area if antennas were placed on it; and
4. One of the following:
i. Written documentation that the applicant made diligent but unsuccessful efforts for permission to install or co-locate the applicant’s telecommunications facilities on existing towers or usable antenna support structures located within a one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site; or
ii. Written, technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower or telecommunications facilities cannot be installed or co-located on another person’s tower or usable antenna support structure located within a one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site and must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the applicant’s communications system.
c. Review Standards. In addition to the conditional use permit standards contained in KGBC 18.90.040(c), the application will be reviewed for the following:
1. Interference. The placement, design, use and operation of telecommunications facilities shall comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the rules of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
2. Design.
i. All towers shall be designed and certified by a licensed engineer for structural soundness and conformity with all applicable building, mechanical, and electrical codes as well as State and federal law.
ii. Site Location and Screening. Towers shall be located and painted so as to minimize their visibility where practicable, except as dictated by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
d. Development Standards. In addition to the setback, height, and area standards of the zone in which the use is located and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the following standards must be met:
1. Setbacks. No telecommunications tower or facility shall be located in the required minimum setbacks in any zone, with the exception that the use of existing light poles, high voltage poles or towers, and telecommunications towers are exempt from the setback requirements; provided, that such pole or telecommunications tower is not increased in height. Placement of new towers shall be set back from adjacent property lines a distance equal to or greater than to the actual height of the tower.
2. Height. Towers are exempt from the height restrictions of the zone they are located in subject to the following limitations: towers allowed in nonresidential zones shall not exceed 200 feet in height; towers allowed in residential zones shall not exceed 60 feet in height. Tower height shall be measured from the lowest adjoining grade to the highest point of construction and attachments thereto.
3. Lighting. No telecommunications towers or antennas shall be artificially illuminated unless required by law or the Federal Aviation Administration.
4. Fencing and Climb Guards. A freestanding tower shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than eight feet in height and secured so that it is not accessible by the general public. Fence design, materials and colors shall reflect the character of the surrounding area. Climb guards are required on towers that are attached to existing structures when mounted on the ground and unable to be enclosed by fencing.
5. Access. Adequate access to the facility must be provided from a public right-of-way or easement consistent with the type of facility constructed. Sites off the road system do not require access via a right-of-way.
6. Freestanding towers shall be designed in all respects so as to accommodate co-location of the applicant’s antennas and at least two additional users and to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower, antennas mounted at varying heights, and to accommodate supporting buildings and equipment.
e. Any tower or antenna which is not used for three years shall be removed along with any associated aboveground facilities within 90 days of said three years unless an extension is approved by the planning commission prior to the expiration of said 90 days. Failure to remove a tower or antenna as provided by this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and the borough may seek abatement of the nuisance at the property owner’s expense.
(w) “U” Uses. Reserved.
(x) “V” Uses. Reserved.
(y) “W” Uses. Reserved.
(z) “X” Uses. Reserved.
(aa) “Y” Uses. Reserved.
(bb) “Z” Uses. Reserved.


CHAPTER 18.60 Setback, Height and Area Requirements

18.60.010 Purpose.

(a) Specific purposes of this chapter include:
(1) Preserving light and air, and avoiding congestion in Residential zoning districts;
(2) Ensuring setbacks, which provide a reasonable relationship between residences;
(3) Promoting streetscapes that are consistent with the intended character of different commercial and mixed-use zones;
(4) Controlling the overall building bulk and lot coverage to help define the character of different zones; and
(5) Promoting a reasonable building scale that is consistent with the function of commercial areas and the character of surrounding neighborhoods.
(b) General Provisions.
(1) Unless otherwise noted, building and structure height is measured as prescribed under definitions for maximum structure height or maximum building height and grade as applicable.
(2) On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow more than two and one-half feet in height within the triangular area formed by the street lines of such corner lots and a straight line joining points along said street lines 10 feet distant from the point of intersection.
(3) On any lot with more than one street frontage, only that lot line from which primary access to the property is derived shall be considered the front lot line. All other frontages shall be considered side or rear lot lines depending on which definition they most closely adhere as determined by the zoning official.
(4) Unless otherwise provided in this title, any structure that is exempt from the requirement to obtain a zoning permit per KGBC 18.90.020(b)(2) may be placed within the setbacks.
(5) Lot lines that separate the lot from salt water shall have no required yards.
(6) Eaves and overhangs of any principal building or accessory building may be built in a required yard or setback, subject to the following limitations:
a. The width of the eave or overhang shall not exceed 24 inches in width; and
b. The eave or overhang may not conceal any habitable space.
(7) Open, uncovered decks providing required off-street parking or access to required off-street parking may be built in required yards.
(8) Addition Extension Setback Exception. Either a front, side, or rear required yard setback for an addition to a preexisting structure shall be reduced by 20 percent; provided, that the axis of the addition is congruent with the axis of the preexisting structure. The minimum setback provided for under this exception is three feet.
(9) Addition to Preexisting Nonconforming Structure Setback Exception. Required yard setbacks for additions to preexisting nonconforming structures shall be reduced to the existing minimum setback; provided, that the addition does not increase that portion of the improved structure within the setback required by the zoning district by more than 50 percent. The minimum setback provided for under this exception is three feet.


18.60.020 Residential development requirements.

(a) Development Requirements Table. The following table provides the development requirements for the Residential zoning districts. Area is in square feet, width, minimum yards, and maximum height are in feet, and maximum lot coverage is a percentage (%).

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage | Maximum Number of Dwellings per Lot
Area | Width | Front | Side | Rear
RR | 50,000 | 160 | 25 | 30 | 60 | 30 | 25 | 1
RS | 25,000 | 110 | 15 | 15 | 20 | 30 | 50 | 2
RL | 15,000 | 100 | 15 | 15 | 20 | 30 | 50 | 3
RN | 10,000 | 75 | 15 | 10 | 20 | 30 | 50 | 3
RM | 5,000 | 50 | 10 | 5 | 15 | 30 | 50 | 4
RH | 5,000 | 50 | 10 | 5 | 5 1 | 30 | 100 | No Limit

Special Circumstances
1RH Rear Yard. Where the rear lot line of a lot in an RH zone abuts a lot in an RL, RS, RN or RM zone the minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet.
[Ord. No. 2048, §11, 9-16-24; Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.60.030 Commercial development requirements.

The following table provides the development requirements for the Commercial zoning districts. Area is in square feet, width, minimum yards, and maximum height are in feet, and maximum lot coverage is a percentage (%).

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage | Maximum Number of Dwellings per Lot
Area | Width | Front | Side | Rear

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage | Maximum Number of Dwellings per Lot
Area | Width | Front | Side | Rear
CC | 0 | 50 | 0 | 0 | 0 | None | 100 | No limit
CG | 0 | 50 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 50 | 100 | No limit
FD | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | None | 100 | 1
Zone | Special Circumstances
CC | 1. Where a CC zone abuts or is separated by an alley from a residential zone, yards shall be provided as required in the adjacent residential zone.
CG | 2. All open storage shall be enclosed by an eight-foot-high fence. 3. Where a CG zone abuts or is separated by an alley from a residential zone, yards shall be provided as required in the adjacent residential zone, and the use or building in the CG zone shall be screened by a sight-obscuring fence or hedge.
FD | 4. Residential development in the FD zone shall be in accordance with the development requirements of the RS zone. 5. For all logging, mining and similar industrial extractive activities, a strip of uncleared land at least 100 feet wide shall be provided between such uses and all public rights-of-way and all adjoining boundaries of residential zones or recreational areas.

[Ord. No. 2048, §11, 9-16-24; Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.60.040 Industrial development requirements.

The following table provides the development requirements for the Industrial zoning districts. Area is in square feet, width, minimum yards, and maximum height are in feet, and maximum lot coverage is a percentage (%).

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage | Maximum Number of Dwellings per Lot
Area | Width | Front | Side | Rear

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage | Maximum Number of Dwellings per Lot
Area | Width | Front | Side | Rear
IL | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 50 | 100 | No limit
IH | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | None | 100 | 2
Zone | Special Circumstances
IL | 1. Whenever an IL zone abuts or is separated by an alley from a residential zone, the use or building in the IL zone shall be screened by a sight-obscuring fence or hedge. 2. The proposed use or structure shall not interfere with electrical processes in nearby buildings or land uses . 3. Any lighting shall not be used in a manner which produces glare on public highways and neighboring property. Arc welding, acetylene torch cutting and similar processes shall be performed so as not to be seen outside the property. 4. Uses causing the emission of any toxic or corrosive fumes or gases are prohibited. 5. Dust and smoke created by industrial operations shall not be exhausted or wasted into the air in such a manner as to settle upon or enter the airspace of surrounding properties at an elevation below the highest point of any building or structure located thereon. 6. Any obscured storage shall be enclosed with an eight-foot-high view-obscuring fence of good appearance acceptable to the planning commission . Whenever lumber, coal or other combustible material is stored, a roadway shall be provided, graded and maintained from the street to the rear of the property to permit free access for fire trucks at any time. 7. No shipping and receiving dock located within 100 feet of a residential district shall be operated between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
IH | 8. Dwelling units may only be for a caretaker or watchman. 9. Whenever an IH zone abuts or is separated by an alley from a residential zone, a 50-foot-wide buffer shall be provided, or where necessary be reestablished, between the use or structure in the IH zone and the boundary of the residential zone.

[Ord. No. 2084, §13, 9-15-25; Ord. No. 2048, §11, 9-16-24; Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.60.050 Miscellaneous development requirements.

(a) Development Requirements Table. The following table provides the development requirements for the Miscellaneous zoning districts. Area is in square feet, width, minimum yards, and maximum height are in feet, and maximum lot coverage is a percentage (%).

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage
Area | Width | Front | Side | Rear

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage
Area | Width | Front | Side | Rear
AD | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | None | 100
PLI | 0 | 0 | 10 | 10 | 10 | None | 100
HD | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 0 | 2 stories | 100
Zone | Special Circumstances
AD | 1. Buildings, uses and structures in the Airport Reserve are not subject to the provisions of this title.
PLI | 2. Where a PLI zone abuts or is separated by an alley from a residential zone, yards shall be provided as required in the adjacent residential zone.
HD | 3. No building walls shall be closer than five feet. 4. No person shall build a new structure of more than two stories, plus attic space, nor shall any person remodel an existing structure to exceed two stories plus attic. For the purposes of this chapter, “attic space” shall be defined as space solely accessory to the second-story use , and as the space between intersection of the roof rafters/second-floor ceiling joists and the roof peak, with or without dormer windows providing light. Ingress to the attic shall be solely from inside the second-floor space. In no case shall new buildings or alterations to existing buildings exceed 32 feet in height above the boardwalk level to the highest point of the roof. New buildings or alterations to existing buildings at higher elevations and set back more than 25 feet from the Creek Street boardwalk shall not exceed 30 feet in height as determined by KGBC 18.10.140 , definition of “ maximum building height ,” measured solely from the building side closest to the creek. 5. No person shall build or install a window of materials other than wood and glass, with the exception of necessary metal elements as required by fire codes. No person shall install a window other than a single- or double-hung window. The zoning official may permit installation of windows of other types where such a window is associated with an entry or is the only practicable solution. Windows shall not exceed a maximum sash width of three feet. Skylights may only be permitted after board review and in locations not visible from the boardwalk or adjacent rights-of-way. 6. No person shall build or install window trim and door trim of any material other than wood. 7. No person shall build or install doors of any material other than wood or wood and glass, nor shall double entry doors be allowed. 8. No person shall build or install exterior stairs and railings other than those constructed of wood. 9. No person shall install siding or trim on buildings or structures other than wood siding or trim; provided, however, that the zoning official may permit the installation of trim or siding other than wooden where such trim or siding is not exposed to view. Wood siding shall be shingles, shakes, board and batten, or horizontal bevel, channel or drop siding. Horizontal bevel siding shall not exceed four inches of exposure and channel and drop siding shall not exceed six inches of exposure. 10. No person shall use other than timber piling where such piling is exposed to view; provided, however, that the zoning official may permit the use of structural support other than timber pilings where such structural support is not exposed to view. 11. Concrete pads or rock footings are permitted. 12. No person shall build or install a roof or dormer with less than a minimum pitch ratio of eight to 12. 13. No person shall build or install a roof constructed of materials other than wood, asphalt or weathering metals such as, but not limited to, copper, tin or Cor-Ten. 14. No person shall build a roof form of other than a gable or hip. Shed roofs shall be allowed for accessory roof forms such as dormers or additions. 15. Dormers shall be accessory to the main roof form. No dormer shall be wider than eight feet and the ridge line of the dormer must be set at least two feet lower than the ridge line of the roof. The front wall of a dormer must be set back at least two feet from the front wall of the building and at least three feet from the side wall and must not cover more than 33 percent of the roof plane area. 16. No person shall build, install, use , operate, maintain or keep any flashing or colored lights, strobe lights, revolving lights or sequential lighting of any kind. 17. No person shall build, install, use , operate, maintain or keep a loudspeaker which is audible outside a building or structure , and under no circumstances may any loudspeaker be used as outdoor advertising or outdoor entertainment or used in conjunction with any musical instrument, voice or similar outdoor entertainment. 18. Undeveloped public lands and private properties shall be left in a natural state of vegetation until development permits are obtained. Construction shall minimize disturbance of natural vegetation, and where disturbed, shall be replanted with species common to the creek banks, including salmonberries, blueberries, alder, hemlock and spruce trees, deer ferns, grasses and mosses. Landscape and planting plans shall be reviewed by the board. 19. Automatic fire extinguishing systems shall be installed in accordance with the latest State-adopted National Fire Protection Association standard, in all new buildings. Exterior sprinkler protection shall be installed on exterior sides of buildings when deemed necessary by the Ketchikan fire department or the State Fire Marshal. 20. Products of combustion (other than heat) detectors and alarms shall be installed in each individual dwelling unit in Groups H and I occupancies. All other aspects of the Alaska Fire Safety Code such as, but not limited to, exits, exit lighting and signing, fire-resistive separations of hazard areas, and restaurant kitchen exhaust venting shall be complied with. 21. Upon a change in the occupancy classification of these existing buildings , they may be made to comply with the requirements for a new building when, in the discretion of the Ketchikan fire department or that of the State Fire Marshal, it is deemed necessary to protect the public safety. 22. The Ketchikan fire department and State Fire Marshal shall review all proposed new buildings or alterations to existing buildings , and may, at their discretion, increase fire protection requirements on any construction where more stringent measures are deemed necessary to ensure adequate fire safety standards.

[Ord. No. 2048, §11, 9-16-24; Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.60.060 Overlay development requirements.

(a) Development Requirements Table. The following table provides the development requirements for the Overlay zoning districts. Area is in square feet, width, minimum yards, and maximum height are in feet, and maximum lot coverage is a percentage (%).

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage | Maximum Number of Dwellings per Lot

Zone | Minimum Lot Dimensions | Minimum Yards | Maximum Height | Maximum Lot Coverage | Maximum Number of Dwellings per Lot
ALL | As permitted in the underlying zoning district
Zone | Special Circumstances
CI | 1. Labor Force. The use must be conducted by the family occupying the dwelling unit at the site. One nonresident/nonoccupant may be employed at the site or used as a part of the labor force at the site. 2. Occupancy of Lot . The use must occupy no more than the lot upon which the principal residence is located, or one adjoining lot , or both the lot occupied by the principal residence and one adjoining lot , provided all applicable setbacks are observed. 3. Signage is limited to one sign as permitted in underlying zone for home occupations . 4. Compliance with such conditions as permitted in KGBC 18.90.040 to protect the residential character, health, safety, welfare and quiet enjoyment of surrounding properties.
MBU | 5. There are no development requirements specific to the MBU overlay.
MBR | 6. There are no development requirements specific to the MBR overlay.
NT | 7. New structures , substantial remodels of existing structures , and replacement of existing exterior materials with the overlay district as defined below will comply with the following building design and materials standards. 8. Exterior building architecture shall be generally consistent with the traditional character of early 20th century Ketchikan through the 1950s. Examples of consistency include the original construction of existing structures with the Newtown Overlay District ; and 9. Siding/Window Trim. The window trim, doors (not including glass panels), and the siding on exposed sides of all new structures undergoing substantial remodeling or renovation, and replacements of existing wooden window trim and wooden siding on exposed sides of existing structures , shall consist of wood or of materials which simulate the appearance of wood by having a wood grain texture such as Hardiplank. Wood or faux-wood siding does not include vinyl siding or T-111; however, structures having T-111 or metal siding on May 6, 2008, may replace the existing metal or T-111 with new metal or T-111. Wood or faux-wood window casings and/or frames will not be required. However, if an existing structure is demolished under any circumstance on or after May 6, 2008, replacement of the structure must meet with the design and material standards, excluding metal or T-111; and 10. Awnings. Storefronts abutting sidewalks must have awnings and/or rain marquees; and 11. Window Shutters. Storefront windows shall not be boarded up during weeks and/or months when the business is not open but finished shutters may be installed; and 12. Signs . Signage within the Newtown Overlay District prohibits signs larger than six square feet in area, overhanging any sidewalk. All signs overhanging the sidewalk must have at least seven feet minimum clearance from top of sidewalk to bottom of sign . Surface-mounted signs are permitted to a maximum of 32 square feet and shall not exceed one foot in depth. Rooftop and/or awning top signs are prohibited. All signs must be permitted by the zoning official . Material for signs must be either wood, steel, porcelain-enameled steel, glass, stone, or a combination thereof; and 13. Flashing Lights. Flashing lights, including strobe, revolving, or sequential lighting of any kind, are prohibited; and 14. Loudspeakers. Loudspeakers shall not be audible outside a building or structure and under no circumstances may any loudspeaker be used as outdoor advertising or outdoor entertainment or used in conjunction with any musical instrument, voice, or similar outdoor entertainment. 15. These standards shall be liberally construed in favor of the property owner.

[Ord. No. 2048, §11, 9-16-24; Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


CHAPTER 18.70 Off-Street Parking and Loading

18.70.010 Off-street parking.

Off-street parking spaces are required for all land uses on any lot with frontage on a developed right-of-way or access easement that is, or is reasonably expected to be within one year, connected to the developed public road system on Revillagigedo Island in accordance with this chapter.


18.70.020 Central parking area.

(a) It is the intent of this section that off-street parking facilities are to be provided in the central parking area through the special assessment district process whenever feasible.
(b) There is hereby created the central parking area comprising all of the land located within the area designated and depicted as the central parking area on the official zoning map.
(c) Permanently maintained off-street parking within the central parking area shall be provided by either of the two following methods at the time of construction, placement, alteration, enlargement, or change in use, of any structure that creates an increase in required parking, computed as provided in this section:
(1) A private off-street parking lot shall be provided as specified in KGBC 18.70.060; or
(2) All persons possessing an interest of record in the property shall sign a written covenant in such form as is acceptable to the zoning administrator agreeing not to object to the establishment of a special assessment district to provide off-street parking facilities and to pay special assessment district assessments on the property in the amounts and manner as determined pursuant to such special assessment proceedings.
(3) The fees for recording said document shall be borne by the applicant.


18.70.030 Other areas on the road system.

In all other areas of the borough there shall be provided at the time of the construction, placement, alteration, enlargement, or change in use of any structure that creates an increase in required parking, computed as provided in this section, permanently maintained off-street parking facilities for the use of occupants, employees or patrons of such structure, and it shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner and occupant of any structure to provide, and to thereafter maintain, the following minimum free off-street parking facilities.


18.70.040 General requirements.

(a) When a parking requirement is stated in terms of employees, it means the maximum number of employees who will be at the property at any given time, either on a single shift or an overlap of shifts. In computing the total parking requirement for a use, any fraction of one-half or more shall require more space.
(b) Where there is more than one use in a single structure or on a site (e.g., doctor, attorney and retail grocery) or two or more separate instances of the same use, off-street parking requirements shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses.
(c) Joint Parking Areas. Where two or more uses provide a joint parking area, and their total required spaces is 20 or more, the minimum requirement will be 75 percent of the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately.
(d) All parking spaces provided pursuant to this chapter shall be on the same lot with the main use it serves or on an adjoining lot except that the planning commission may permit parking spaces to be on any lot within 200 feet of the use if it determines that it is impractical to provide parking on the same lot.
(e) No existing parking area and no parking area provided for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall hereafter be relinquished or reduced in any manner below the requirements herein established.
(f) Where the parking requirements for a particular use are not specifically established by this chapter, the structures or premises parking requirements for such use shall be determined by the zoning official, and such determination shall be based upon the requirements for similar specified uses.
(g) Uses that are primarily utilized by visitors arriving by tour bus must demonstrate that there is adequate parking and maneuvering room for the anticipated number of buses.
(h) At the time of application, a site plan shall be submitted to the zoning official responsible for the enforcement of this title who shall approve or disapprove the plan on the basis of its conformance to this title.


18.70.050 Compact car allowance.

(a) In parking lots of less than 10 parking spaces in commercial and industrial zones, the total required parking area shall first be determined using standard size parking spaces. In the event such total parking area is provided, the applicant may elect to convert up to 50 percent of such total parking area to compact car size parking spaces, and the remaining portion of such total required parking area shall be composed of standard size parking spaces.
(b) Commercial and Industrial Zones. In commercial and industrial zones, in computing the total parking area required for parking lots of 10 parking spaces or more, compact car size parking spaces may be substituted, at the option of the applicant, in lieu of standard size parking spaces on a one-for-one basis, up to a maximum of 50 percent of the total number of required spaces.


18.70.060 Development requirements.

(a) Each standard size parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet wide by 20 feet long and each compact car size parking space shall be a minimum of seven feet wide by 15 feet long, exclusive of access and circulation aisles.
(b) All parking lots shall be provided with a stabilized, well-drained surface.
(c) No area in a parking lot shall be used for sales display, dead storage, repair work or any purpose other than parking of vehicles.
(d) Any lighting of parking lots shall be arranged in such a manner as to reflect away from public rights-of-way and from any adjoining residential areas.
(e) In all parking lots where compact car spaces are provided, appropriate signing shall provide for clear distinction between standard and compact parking spaces.
(f) Off-Street Parking Requirements Table.

Use Category | Parking Calculation

Use Category | Parking Calculation
Agriculture: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per business owner 1 space per company vehicle 1 space per hobby garden stand
Automotive: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per business owner 1 space per company vehicle 1 space per primary service provider (mechanic/technician, sales person ) 4 spaces per service bay 1 space per vehicle in rental or sales inventory 1 space per taxi 1 space per vehicle in fleet 1 space for every 5,000 square feet of impound area
Aviation: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per pilot 1 space per mechanic 1 space per business owner 1 space per dispatcher 1 space per company vehicle 1 space for every 2 aircraft passenger seats
Communication: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per company vehicle
Entertainment: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space for every 5 seats 1 space for every 5 persons allowed by maximum occupancy that are not otherwise accounted for
Food/beverage: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space for every 5 seats 1 space for every company vehicle 1 space for every 5 persons allowed by maximum occupancy that are not otherwise accounted for
Funerary: | 2 spaces for every acre of cemetery space 1/2 space per employee 1 space for every company vehicle 1 space for every 5 permanent seats
Health care: | 4 spaces for every primary service provider 1/2 space for every employee 1 space for every hospital bed 1 space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area in a detoxification center 1 space for every 4 nursing home or convalescent center beds
Industrial: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per company owner 1 space per company vehicle 1 space for every 4,000 square feet of floor area , except storage areas
Lodging : | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per company vehicle 1 space for every hotel or motel room, tourist cabin, or resort cabin 1 space per sleeping room containing 2 or fewer beds 1 space for every 2 beds for rooms containing more than 2 beds
Marijuana : | 1/2 space for every employee 1 space per company owner 1 space for every company vehicle 1 space for every 250 square feet of retail display area
Marine: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per company vehicle 1 space for every boat in rental fleet 1 space for every 2,000 square feet of vessel display area
Meeting: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space for every 5 persons allowed by maximum occupancy that are not otherwise accounted for
Mobile Buildings : | 1 space per dwelling unit 1 space per mobile building space in a mobile building park As required by the use contained in nonresidential mobile buildings
Municipal: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per company vehicle 1 space per 400 square feet of animal shelter gross floor area 1 space per 10 inmates 1 space per 5,000 square feet of park or playground area 22 spaces per playfields 1 space per 800 square feet of library or museum floor area 1 space per classroom 1 space for every 3 school auditorium seats
Office: | 1/2 space per employee 2 spaces for every primary service provider 1 space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area in a service office
Recreation: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per shooting facility lane 1 space per lodge sleeping room 4 spaces per golf green 3 spaces per miniature golf hole 1 space for every club member
Religious: | 1 space for each rabbi, priest, imam, pastor, or similar 1 space for every 10 members of the congregation 1 space per sleeping room
Residential 1 , 2 , 3 : | 1 space per dwelling unit
Resource industry: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per company vehicle
Retail: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space for every 250 sq. ft. of nonbulky retail display space 1 space for every 1,000 sq. ft. of bulky retail, art display, or wholesale display space 1 space for every garden stand
Service: | 1/2 space for every employee 1 space for every company vehicle 2 spaces for every salon chair, barber chair, tanning bed, or tattoo station 1 space for boarding kennels 1 space for every 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area in banks 1 space for every 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area in commercial day cares
Shipping: | 1/2 space per employee 1 space per company vehicle 1 space for every 250 square feet of floor area accessible to customers
Storage: | 1/2 per employee 1 space for every 12 auto or boat storage spaces 1 space for every 20 self-storage units not directly accessible by vehicle

Special Circumstances
1Four-family dwellings have specific parking standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(h)(1).
2Triplex dwellings have specific parking standards contained in KGBC 18.50.020(v)(3).
3One commercial vehicle may be parked on a residential lot as an accessory use.
[Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


CHAPTER 18.80 Signs

18.80.010 Signs and advertising devices.

Sign and advertising devices are placed in accordance with this section and the sign development table.


18.80.020 General requirements.

(a) A permit shall be obtained from the zoning official for this title prior to the installation of any exterior sign or nameplate, excepting: those less than three square feet in area; governmental notices, information or education; and governmental public safety signage. Sign permit applications shall include plans for all signs to be placed. The plans shall illustrate sign elevations, cross sections, dimensions, placement on the site, materials, and lighting. Construction and erection of signs shall be in accordance with this title. Building permits may be required.
(b) Signs permitted under this chapter shall advertise only the business or activity engaged in on the immediate premises. In the case of building complexes with multiple tenants, immediate premises shall be considered the actual store frontage or that portion of the leased space abutting the right-of-way. Subject to the other requirements of the ordinance codified in this chapter, one directory sign is allowed per building facade, either mounted flush or as a freestanding or monument sign.
(c) No sign shall be erected at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device. Signs that impede public safety may be removed without notice at the owner’s expense.
(d) Flashing signs and intermittent illumination are permitted only in commercial and industrial zones, with the exception of the Central Commercial zone and Newtown Overlay, where flashing, blinking, or intermittently illuminated signs visible from the exterior of a building are prohibited.
(e) Abandoned signs shall be removed by the property owner within six months of the cessation of the principal activity.
(f) Roof-mounted signs, including any signs painted on the roof surface, but excepting those mounted on a marquee or canopy, are prohibited.


18.80.030 Table of sign development standards for the Residential zones.

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet; sign size and area are in square feet
Type | Number | Size | Height | Setback | Illumination | Duration
Freestanding | SC 1 , 2 | SC 1 , 2 | 15 | 10 | X | No limit
Wall | SC 1 , 2 | SC 1 , 2 | No limit | None | X | No limit

Zone – Special Circumstances
All Residential Zones
1One freestanding or wall sign is allowed for home occupation and cottage industry uses. One sign is allowed for each use and can be no larger than 10 square feet.
2Signs for nonconforming uses are limited in size to 32 square feet. One nonconforming use sign is allowed for each property.
[Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.80.040 Table of sign development standards for the Commercial zones.

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet; sign size and area are in square feet

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet; sign size and area are in square feet
Type | Number | Size | Height | Setback | Illumination | Duration
Directory | SC 1 | SC 2 | 30 | 1 7 | No limit | No limit
Freestanding | 2 3 | 50 | 30 4 | 1 7 | No limit | No limit
Hanging | 1 5 | 10 | SC 6 | 1 7 | No limit | No limit
Projecting | 2 3 , 11 | 50 | SC 8 | 1 7 | No limit | No limit
Temporary | 1 9 | 50 | No limit | None | No limit | SC 10
Wall | No limit | No limit 12 | No limit | None | No limit | No limit
Window | No limit | No limit 13 | No limit | None | No limit | No limit

Zone – Special Circumstances
All Zones
1One directory sign per street frontage is allowed for multiple business buildings or complexes.
2Directory signs are limited to 16 square feet plus an additional six square feet per business in the building or complex.
3Two freestanding and projecting signs are allowed per business.
4Freestanding signs that project beyond property lines must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above any areas used by pedestrians. This limitation does not apply to monument signs.
5One hanging sign is allowed per business for each street frontage entry to the business.
6Hanging signs must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above the finished sidewalk grade, with the exception that signs hanging under an existing canopy that is less than eight feet six inches above the finished sidewalk grade must have at least seven feet of clearance above the finished sidewalk grade.
7Directory, freestanding, hanging and projecting signs must be mounted such that they are no closer than 12 inches from the curb line.
8Projecting signs that project beyond property lines must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above any areas used by pedestrians. This limitation does not apply to monument signs.
9Each business may display one temporary sign in any calendar year.
10Temporary signs may be displayed for no more than 30 days in any calendar year.
CC
11In the CC zone one projecting sign is allowed.
12Walls signs in the CC zone are limited in size to two square feet per linear foot of street frontage of the business.
13Window signs in the CC zone can cover no more than 40 percent of the area of the window in which they are located.
[Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.80.050 Table of sign development standards for the Industrial zones.

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet; sign size and area are in square feet

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet; sign size and area are in square feet
Type | Number | Size | Height | Setback | Illumination | Duration
Directory | SC 1 | SC 2 | 30 | 1 7 | No limit | No limit
Freestanding | 2 3 | 50 | 30 4 | 1 7 | No limit | No limit
Hanging | SC 5 | 10 | SC 6 | 1 7 | No limit | No limit
Projecting | 2 3 , 11 | 50 | SC 8 | 1 7 | No limit | No limit
Temporary | SC 9 | 50 | No limit | None | No limit | SC 10
Wall | No limit | No limit | No limit | None | No limit | No limit
Window | No limit | SC 11 | No limit | None | No limit | No limit

Zone – Special Circumstances
All Zones
1One directory sign per street frontage is allowed for multiple business buildings or complexes.
2Directory signs are limited to 32 square feet plus 12 square feet per business in the building or complex.
3Two freestanding and projecting signs are allowed per business.
4Freestanding signs that project beyond property lines must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above any areas used by pedestrians. This limitation does not apply to monument signs.
5One hanging sign is allowed per business for each street frontage entry to the business.
6Hanging signs must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above the finished sidewalk grade, with the exception that signs hanging under an existing canopy that is less than eight feet six inches above the finished sidewalk grade must have at least seven feet of clearance above the finished sidewalk grade.
7Directory, freestanding, hanging and projecting signs must be mounted such that they are no closer than 12 inches from the curb line.
8Projecting signs that project beyond property lines must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above any areas used by pedestrians.
9Each business may display one temporary sign in any calendar year.
10Temporary signs may be displayed for no more than 30 days in any calendar year.
11Window signs can cover no more than 40 percent of the area of the window in which they are located.
[Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.80.060 Table of sign development standards for the Miscellaneous zones.

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet, sign size and area are in square feet

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet, sign size and area are in square feet
Type 9 | Number | Size | Height | Setback | Illumination | Duration
Freestanding 12 | 2 1 | 50 | 30 2 | No limit | No limit | No limit
Hanging | SC 3 | 10 7 | SC 4 | SC 5 | No limit 8 | No limit
Projecting | 2 1 | 50 10 | SC 6 | No limit | No limit 8 | No limit
Wall | No limit | No limit 11 | No limit | No limit | No limit 8 | No limit

Zone – Special Circumstances
All Zones
1Two freestanding or projecting signs are allowed per business.
2Freestanding signs that project beyond property lines must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above any areas used by pedestrians. This limitation does not apply to monument signs.
3One hanging sign is allowed per business for each street frontage entry to the business.
4Hanging signs must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above the finished sidewalk grade, with the exception that signs hanging under an existing canopy that is less than eight feet six inches above the finished sidewalk grade must have at least seven feet of clearance above the finished sidewalk grade.
5Hanging signs must be mounted such that they are no closer than 12 inches from the curb line.
6Projecting signs that project beyond property lines must maintain at least eight feet of vertical clearance above any areas used by pedestrians.
HD
7Hanging signs in the HD zone are limited in size to six square feet.
8In the HD zone no person shall illuminate any sign with other than incandescent or neon lighting. In other zones there is no limitation on lighting.
9In the HD zone, no person shall build, install, use, operate, maintain, or keep a sign that is made from materials other than wood, steel, porcelain-enameled steel, glass, stone, or a combination thereof.
10In the HD zone projecting signs are limited to six square feet. In other zones the limit is 50 square feet.
11In the HD zone wall signs are limited to 25 square feet. In other zones there is no size limit.
PLI
12Freestanding signs are allowed only in the PLI zone.
[Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.80.070 Table of sign development standards for the Overlay zones.

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet; sign size and area are in square feet

SC = Special Circumstance, X = Prohibited Setbacks are in feet; sign size and area are in square feet
Type | Number | Size | Height | Setback | Illumination | Duration
As contained in the underlying zone except as provided for in Special Circumstances below.
Zone | Special Circumstances
CI | 1. One sign as permitted for home occupations is allowed.
NT | 2. The maximum size of hanging signs is six square feet.
 | 3.
 | 4.
 | 5.
 | 6.
 | 7.
 | 8.

[Ord. No. 2022, §15 (Exh. A), 7-17-23.]


18.80.080 Elimination of nonconforming signs.

(a) Existing permitted signs which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter shall be brought into compliance or eliminated within three years from the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, with the exception of nonconforming temporary signs, banner signs, or flashing or blinking signs, which must be removed within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(b) A nonconforming sign shall lose its legal, nonconforming status if the sign is altered in any way in structure, color, or copy, or is substantially damaged, relocated, or replaced.
(c) The code administrator shall order the removal of any sign erected, installed, or allowed to remain in violation of this chapter. He or she shall give at least 30 days’ notice in writing, to the owner of such sign, or of the building, structure, or premises on which such sign is located, to remove the sign or bring it into compliance with this chapter. The director may order removal of the sign at the expense of the owner of the premises if compliance with the written order is not obtained. In the case of temporary signs, banner signs, portable signs or pennants, only seven days’ notice need be given.


CHAPTER 18.90 Application Processing Procedures

18.90.010 Purpose and structure of this chapter.

The purpose of this chapter is to enumerate the various processes the borough has developed to execute the provisions of AS Title 29 that require second class boroughs to adopt land use regulations. For each process the following information is provided: the purpose of the process; the authority for the grant or denial of an application submitted to initiate the process; the application requirements; the process that will be followed in evaluating a decision on the application; the standards by which the application will be evaluated; the responsibilities and authorities the reviewing agency has in making a decision on an application; and the process by which a decision can be appealed.


18.90.020 Administrative permits.

(a) Zoning Permits.
(1) Intent. Zoning permits are a tool that is used to verify that the development and/or uses on a parcel of land do, or will when completed, meet the minimum requirements of this title. These minimum requirements are intended to protect the general health and welfare of the public by: preventing or limiting impacts between property uses, and thereby conflicts between property owners; enhancing the ability of first responders and utility providers to provide services; ensuring properties have access to adequate wastewater disposal; reducing unnecessary burdens on public infrastructure; and minimizing the damage caused by disaster events.
(b) Zoning Land Development Permits.
(1) A zoning land development permit is required:
a. Prior to starting new construction, or the erection, assemblage, or placement of a structure and/or accessory of attachment thereto unless construction, erection or assemblage is exempt under subsection (b)(2) of this section.
b. Prior to starting the alteration, movement, or enlargement of enclosed space, or the coverage of any uncovered area of any existing structure and/or appurtenance, unless the alteration, movement, enlargement, or coverage is exempt under subsection (b)(2) of this section.
c. In order to utilize a variance in accordance with KGBC 18.90.030.
d. In order to utilize a conditional use permit in accordance with KGBC 18.90.040.
e. When certainty of the nonconforming status of an existing building or structure is desired.
f. To bring an existing building, structure, or accessory that exists in violation of this title into compliance.
(2) Exceptions.
a. Fences not exceeding 12 feet in height.
b. The construction, alteration, replacement or repair of building systems and components within the existing enclosed space of the structure, including interior partitions and finishes, cabinetry, and heating, electrical, or plumbing systems.
c. Repair or replacement of exterior finishes, the replacement or installation of windows and doors, and the repair of walkways and decks.
d. The construction of covered or uncovered wheelchair ramps, and associated building entry landings less than 120 square feet.
e. Uncovered stairways and walkways providing access to any principal building or accessory subject to the following limitations:
1. Stair width may not exceed 60 inches including treads, stringers, balusters, railings, and supporting structures; and
2. Landings may not be larger than 120 square feet.
3. Walkway width may not exceed 60 inches including decking, stringers, balusters, railings and supporting structures, and may not be more than 30 inches above grade, excluding railings.
f. Coverings less than 120 square feet in area that shelter the entrance to a building.
g. Uncovered driveways and parking areas.
h. The demolition or removal of existing buildings and structures except when demolition or removal is required for compliance with the standards of this title.
i. Not more than one one-story detached accessory building used as tool and storage shed, playhouse, and other similar type use, provided the gross floor area does not exceed 200 square feet, and the roof eaves or overhangs do not project more than 12 inches beyond the outside walls.
j. Docks, gangways, and piers not supporting more than one building meeting the criteria of subsection (b)(2)(i) of this section.
(3) Application Requirements.
a. The application shall be on a form provided by the department and be accompanied by plans containing sufficient information to determine compliance of the proposed construction or alteration with the provisions of this title; and
b. To-scale site plan showing:
1. All property lines; and
2. Existing structures; and
3. Proposed structures; and
4. Parking areas showing compliance with the provisions of Chapter 18.70 KGBC; and
5. Street frontages and access points; and
6. The location of above-ground and below-ground utilities to be installed; and
7. Building height and the method used to calculate it; and
8. For properties with existing buildings, an as-built survey meeting the standards contained in subsection (f) of this section; and
9. An application for a sign permit according to the provisions of Chapter 18.80 KGBC; and
10. An application for a water permit required under KGBC 13.05.030; and
11. An application for a sewer permit required under KGBC 13.10.060, or an approval by the appropriate agency, or certification of the installation of a private sewer system; and
12. An application for a land use permit as contained in subsection (c) of this section.
(c) Zoning Land Use Permits.
(1) A zoning land use permit is required:
a. Prior to the initiation of a new use, additional use, or the expansion of an existing use.
b. Prior to initiation of site development or natural resource extraction either for a subdivision, as provided for in KGBC 17.10.010, or for site development of a parcel as defined in KGBC 18.10.200.
c. In order to utilize a conditional use permit in accordance with KGBC 18.90.040.
d. In order to utilize a variance in accordance with KGBC 18.90.030.
e. Concurrently with a zoning land development permit application if the development will impact a use-dependent development standard or increase the flow of wastewater.
(2) Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirement to obtain a zoning land use permit:
a. Site development not involving the removal of commercially marketable natural resources.
b. A change resulting in a use that has, and meets, identical development standards to the use being replaced.
c. Operation of a mobile food vendor for not more than two hours in one location during any 24-hour period.
(3) Application Requirements.
a. The application shall be on a form provided by the department and contain sufficient information to determine compliance with the provisions of this title.
b. A detailed description of the proposed use to be permitted, including any floor plans or other diagrams necessary to determine compliance with this title, including the parking requirement contained in Chapter 18.70 KGBC.
c. An application for a sign permit according to the provisions of Chapter 18.80 KGBC.
(d) Application Authority. An application for a zoning permit must be signed by the owner(s) of record of the subject property, or any other person authorized to bind the property owner by any terms and conditions that may arise from the issuance of the permit. Any person other than the owner(s) of record must provide written evidence of their authority to file the application.
(e) Decision on Permit Application.
(1) The zoning official shall render a decision within 30 days of the filing of the application of a zoning permit. This time limit may be extended for an additional 30 days with agreement by both the applicant and the zoning official.
(2) The zoning official may impose stipulations and conditions on a zoning permit as may be necessary to ensure compliance with requirements of this section and other provisions of this title. A zoning permit shall not be issued for a proposed project on a property which has uses and/or structures which exist in violation of provisions of this title.
(3) A decision of the zoning official on an application filed pursuant to this section is subject to appeal pursuant to KGBC 18.90.070.
(f) Inspection Required. Except as provided in this section, the applicant shall provide for an inspection of the footings and/or foundation prior to pouring concrete by a professional land surveyor.
(1) An as-built survey of the location of the proposed improvements shall be prepared and immediately submitted to the zoning official. The survey shall demonstrate compliance with plans submitted and approved pursuant to this section.
To be acceptable for the purposes of this subsection, the as-built survey must be of sufficient clarity, legibility, scale and all other aspects for the zoning official to readily and confidently determine compliance with the yard requirements to which the property is subject.
(2) In cases of a proposed improvement, alteration or addition to an existing structure which is the subject of an as-built survey prepared by a professional land surveyor, the applicant may request the zoning official conduct the required inspection. The request shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the borough assembly. The zoning official shall determine compliance with plans submitted and approved pursuant to this section.
a. To be acceptable for the purposes of this subsection, the as-built survey must be of sufficient clarity, legibility, and scale as an as-built meeting the following standards:
1. The as-built is drawn on a sheet of paper no less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches.
2. The as-built is at a scale no less than one inch equals 40 feet.
3. The as-built survey may be at a scale less than one inch equals 40 feet if the lot is too large to fit on a sheet of paper 11 inches by 17 inches in size. In this case, additional sheets or insets must be included that show all improvements regulated by this title at a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet.
4. The as-built shows the distance between the closest property line and all improvements subject to regulation under this chapter.
5. All property lines and improvements are true to the scale shown on the as-built in both the vertical and horizontal axes.
(3) In the case of proposed development on property not accessible from the road system, the applicant may, at the discretion of the zoning official, provide a letter with the notarized signature of the owner or person with the authority to bind the owner of the property stating that they are aware of the setback requirements established in this title and that a failure to meet these requirements constitutes a violation of this title and may result in both civil and criminal penalties.
(4) Verification and Remedies.
a. Following the receipt of the sketch or survey, the zoning official shall verify compliance with the permit issued under this section and other provisions of this title.
b. If improvements do not conform to the approved permit, the zoning official shall cause the applicant to amend the permit; provided, that the improvements otherwise conform to the requirements of this title.
c. If the improvements neither conform to the requirements of the permit nor the provisions of this title, the zoning official shall require the applicant to cease the construction of improvements and remove or modify the improvements, or apply for additional permitting as necessary to provide for compliance with this title.
(g) Duration of a Zoning Permit. Once issued, a zoning permit expires two years after the date it was issued unless the new use begins (for a change in use) or the actual construction is started and diligently continued to completion (for construction, remodeling or reconstruction). Excavation is not considered to be construction for the purpose of enforcing this section.
(h) Zoning Permit Complete. A zoning permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to be complete until all conditions, whether express or implied, are complete.
(i) Special Zoning Permits/Certificate of Approval Within the HD Zone.
(1) Construction, Alteration, Moving or Demolition of Buildings.
a. In the HD zone no person shall construct, alter, move or demolish a building or structure without having first duly applied for and received from the zoning official a certificate of approval.
b. In the HD zone no person shall erect, alter, restore, move or demolish any exterior features of any building or structure, including walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, pavement, other fixtures, above-ground utility structures, or outdoor advertising signs without having first duly applied for and received from the zoning official a certificate of approval. For the purposes of this section, “alteration of exterior features” means and includes but is not limited to architectural style, general design, type and style of windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and natural features such as trees and shrubbery.
c. The zoning official may issue a certificate of approval to move or demolish a building or structure in the HD zone only upon one or more of the following conditions:
1. The city building inspector or the State Fire Marshal has declared in writing that the building or structure is a hazard to public safety and health and that repairs are impossible;
2. Such structure or building is a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the community and which is consistent with the comprehensive plan;
3. Retention of the building or structure would necessarily cause undue financial hardship to the owner;
4. Retention of such building or structure would not be in the best interests of the community as a whole.
d. In cases where the zoning official has duly granted a certificate of approval authorizing the moving or demolition of any building or structure, such certificate of approval shall not be effective until six months after the date of issuance thereof; provided, however, in situations described in subsection (i)(1)(c)(1) of this section, the zoning official, after review of the recommendation of the architectural design review board, may set the effective date of the certificate of approval at less than six months after the date of issuance.
(2) The zoning official shall administer and enforce the procedure and requirements of this subsection and the requirements listed in those sections of this title that relate to the HD zone and make the determinations authorized hereunder. The zoning official may request and shall thereupon receive the assistance and recommendations of the architectural design review board regarding any planning action on property within or abutting the HD zone, including but not limited to proposed subdivision plats and vacations of streets or other public areas, and shall consider any such recommendations, together with the pertinent provisions of this title, in making the determinations authorized by KGBC Title 17 and this title, and in issuing and denying certificates of approval.
(3) Applications for a special zoning permit to construct, alter, move or demolish any building or structure in the HD zone shall be made to the zoning official in the department of planning and community development. Such application shall include official plans, elevations, sections, and site plans showing the proposed construction, alteration, move or demolition. The plans and drawings shall be in sufficient detail for the architectural design review board and zoning official to determine compliance with size, setback, and materials requirements. Presubmittal conferences and conceptual reviews with the architectural design review board and code administrator are encouraged in order to provide assistance to the applicant and to clarify plans and drawing requirements. Application fees for a special zoning permit shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(4) After the filing of the application, the zoning official shall review the application, the plans, elevation, sections and site plans, and shall thereupon have the zoning clerk send to the owners of record of real property within the district notice of the filing of the application. The notice shall state that the application, plans, elevation, sections and site plans will be available in the offices of the zoning official for examination by said owners and that said owners may within 15 days of the mailing of said notice submit to the zoning official, in writing, their concurrences, objections, suggestions and comments thereon. On the eleventh day after said mailing, the clerk shall transmit said application, accompanying documents, concurrences, objections, suggestions and comments to the architectural design review board, together with the zoning official’s comments thereon.
(5) Within 30 days after receiving the application and accompanying documents and the comments of the zoning official, the architectural design review board shall meet and discuss the application and accompanying documents and comments of the zoning official and shall, with the assistance of the zoning clerk, prepare for transmission to the zoning official their written findings, comments and recommended disposition of the application. In making its recommendation, the architectural design review board shall be governed by the policy set forth in KGBC 18.40.010(b)(13) as well as other pertinent provisions of this chapter. If the architectural design review board fails to transmit its recommendations to the zoning official within 40 days after receiving the application from the zoning official, the board shall be deemed to have given its approval to the application and the zoning official shall within an additional five days, according to the policy set forth in KGBC 18.40.010(b)(13), and other pertinent provisions hereof, either approve the application in writing and issue a certificate of approval or deny the application. Thereafter, the applicant, if the application is denied, may appeal to the planning commission, as hereinafter provided.


18.90.030 Variances.

(a) Purpose. The development standards in this title are designed to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing setbacks, maximum building heights and other development standards that apply to various uses. Variances may be granted for land or development with unique characteristics; and provided, that the intent and purpose of the development standards are maintained.
(1) Setbacks. The purpose of setbacks is to provide spacing between buildings to:
a. Provide the occupants with light.
b. Provide air flow between buildings to prevent the transmission of odors.
c. Provide visual and auditory privacy.
d. Provide access to the outside of building faces for maintenance.
e. Prevent the spread of fire between buildings.
f. Give first responders access to the exterior of buildings and undeveloped areas of the property.
g. Provide space for the installation of utilities.
h. Provide for exterior access to undeveloped parts of the property.
i. Provide areas for landscaping.
j. Reduce the potential for drainage impacts between properties.
(2) Height Limits. Height limits restrict the maximum height of buildings and structures to:
a. Prevent the blockage of views.
b. Ensure first responder access to the topmost floor of the building from outside.
c. Prevent hazards to aviation.
d. Ensure compatibility with overhead utilities such as power and communication.
e. Help prevent the erection of structurally unsound buildings and structures.
(3) Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum degree to which a lot can be developed with buildings is limited to:
a. Prevent the construction of buildings of a mass that far exceeds the scale of nearby buildings.
b. Allow sufficient room for the provision of utilities and the placement of on-site wastewater disposal system.
(4) Parking. Off-street parking and loading is required to be made available at minimum levels when a property is put to use to:
a. Provide for convenience of access to the occupants and users of the property.
b. Reduce the need to construct public parking.
c. Prevent the blockage of roadways.
d. Enhance the viability of commercial enterprises by ensuring customers have easy access to the products and service the business provides.
e. Enhance the viability of surrounding businesses by reducing demand on public parking used by patrons who visit multiple businesses in a single trip.
(b) Minor Variances.
(1) Applicability. A request to vary setback requirements by five feet or 50 percent of the required setback, whichever is less, or to vary all quantifiable standards by less than 10 percent may be considered a minor variance, except as provided in subsection (b)(1)(a) of this section regarding off-street parking standards.
a. Notwithstanding the general exclusion of parking variances from minor variance processing, a request to reduce off-street parking requirements by one space may be considered a minor variance where such reduction is associated with the creation of one new dwelling unit on a lot containing an existing residential use.
(2) Application. To be considered complete, an application for a minor variance must meet the standards below:
a. A completed variance application on a form provided by the planning department; and
b. A complete zoning permit application as contained in KGBC 18.90.020; and
c. In the case of undeveloped properties: an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the perimeter of the property including dimensions thereof, significant natural features, and all proposed improvements to include parking and driveways; and
d. In the case of properties containing buildings or structures requiring a zoning permit: (1) an unmodified as-built survey meeting the standards contained in KGBC 18.90.020(f); and (2) an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the perimeter of the property including dimensions thereof, significant natural features, and all existing and proposed improvements to include parking and driveways.
(3) Upon written request of the applicant, a minor variance may be processed under the procedures for a major variance contained in subsection (c) of this section.
(4) Fees. Application fees for minor variances shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(5) Upon receipt of an application for a minor variance, the zoning official shall examine said application and, within 10 days of receipt, notify the applicant of the deficiencies found in the application, or schedule the application for public notice.
(6) Approval Authority. Minor variances are granted, or referred to the planning commission for a public hearing, by the zoning official.
(7) The zoning official shall render a decision within 30 days of the filing of a complete application for a minor variance. As express conditions precedent to the granting of any minor variance the zoning official must determine in writing that:
a. The variance will not reduce the quantifiable standard for which a setback variance is sought by more than 50 percent or five feet, whichever is less; and
b. The variance sought will not reduce off-street parking requirements except that a one-space reduction may be approved where such reduction is associated with the creation of one new dwelling unit on a lot containing an existing residential use; and
c. The variance will not permit a land use in a district in which that use is prohibited; and
d. Public notice did not result in an appeal of the decision to the planning commission in accordance with KGBC 18.90.070.
(8) Within 10 days of the decision, written notice of the request shall be made in accordance with the standards set forth in KGBC 18.90.060(b). The notice shall contain a general description of the request, the location of the affected property and the method by which a decision by the planning commission can be requested.
(9) Upon written request by the applicant or any other person notified in subsection (b)(7) of this section within 15 days of distribution of the notice of request, the variance request shall be referred to the planning commission for processing as a major variance request in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. Decisions of the zoning official on minor variances may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with KGBC 18.90.070.
(10) Unless an appeal is filed with the zoning official to refer the matter to the planning commission for formal consideration under subsection (c) of this section within 15 days of the date of distribution, the decision becomes final.
(11) Appeals to the Planning Commission. Decisions by the zoning official on the grant or appeal of a minor variance may be appealed to the planning commission according to the procedures set out in KGBC 18.90.070.
(c) Major Variances.
(1) Applicability. A request to vary quantifiable standards by more than 10 percent and all variances to parking standards shall be processed and reviewed as a major variance.
(2) Approval Authority. The planning commission may authorize major variances from the requirements of this title, when the criteria contained in subsection (c)(7)(e) of this section are met.
(3) Application. To be considered complete, an application for a major variance must meet the standards below:
a. A completed variance application on a form provided by the planning department; and
b. A complete zoning permit application as contained in KGBC 18.90.020; and
c. In the case of undeveloped properties: an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the perimeter of the property including dimensions thereof, significant natural features, and all proposed improvements to include parking and driveways; and
d. In the case of properties containing buildings or structures requiring a zoning permit: (1) an unmodified as-built survey meeting the standards contained in KGBC 18.90.020(f); and (2) an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, depicting the perimeter of the property including dimensions thereof, significant natural features, and all existing and proposed improvements to include parking and driveways; and
e. The reason for the variance and an explanation of how the variance criteria contained in subsection (c)(7)(e) of this section are satisfied.
(4) Fees. Application fees for variances shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(5) Upon receipt of an application for a major variance, the zoning official shall examine said application and, within 15 days of receipt, notify the applicant of either the deficiencies found in the application, or the date of the meeting at which the request will be heard by the planning commission.
(6) Approval Authority. The planning commission may authorize major variances from the requirements of this title, when the criteria contained in subsection (c)(7)(e) of this section are met.
(7) Procedure.
a. Hearing Scheduled. When the zoning official has determined that the said application meets the requirements of this chapter, they shall forward the completed application to the planning commission for its determination within 60 days of determining the application to be complete, unless such time limit is extended by written consent by the applicant.
b. Public notice shall be as provided in KGBC 18.90.060.
c. From the time of filing such application until the time of such hearing, the application, together with all plans and data submitted, shall be available for public inspection in the office of the zoning official.
d. After the zoning official has duly forwarded the completed application to the planning commission, the planning commission shall study it and shall, within 30 days after the receipt of said application, hold a public hearing whereat it:
1. Shall hear and consider evidence and facts from any person at the public hearing or written communication from any person relative to the matter; and
2. May receive evidence pertinent to the granting or denial of said application according to the standards set forth in subsection (c)(7)(e) of this section.
e. Applicable Criteria. A variance from a quantifiable standard may be granted in accordance with the review procedures provided in this subsection provided the applicant provides evidence that the following standards are met:
1. Special conditions that require the variance are not caused by the person seeking the variance;
2. The variance will not permit a land use in a district in which that use is prohibited;
3. The variance will not solely relieve an inconvenience.
A request for a variance shall be found to be based solely on an inconvenience if an alternative having the same effect is possible without a variance, and would not be complicated by any of the following:
i. Topographical or geological challenges to development; or
ii. Existing development patterns, including building layout, size, and location; or
iii. Irregularities in lot shape that cannot be abated without the acquisition of land from another party.
4. The variance will not solely relieve a pecuniary hardship.
This standard is not met if:
i. An alternative, having the same effect, is possible without a variance, and the alternative would increase the cost of the project by no more than 10 percent; and
ii. No exterior walls of a principal building must be demolished; and
iii. No exterior walls of an accessory building must be demolished, and the value of the building is less than 10 percent of the value of all buildings on the property, or $10,000, whichever is less.
f. If at the said hearing, the planning commission determines that it needs additional information, it may recess said hearing for a period of not more than 30 days, during which time it shall procure or receive such additional information; provided, however, that before it so recesses, it must then and there announce the time and place at which the hearing will be resumed.
g. Within 30 days after the completion of the said hearing, the planning commission shall, in a formal written resolution of the commission, either grant or deny the application, and the planning commission shall make its findings of fact a part thereof.
h. Unless otherwise specified by the planning commission as a condition of approval, any variance approved by the planning commission shall be conditional upon the privilege granted being utilized within six months after the effective date of the variance.
(8) Conditions. Major variances may be granted with conditions to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood and to otherwise achieve the purpose of this title. The effective date or duration of a variance may be limited by the planning commission through a condition of approval.
(9) Revocation and Cancellation of Variance. Any major variance granted under this section that is subject to conditions as allowed in subsection (c)(8) of this section may be revoked and canceled by the planning commission for failure to comply with said conditions. Before taking any action toward revoking such variance, however, the planning commission shall first give the owner of the property upon which the variance is granted 20 days’ written notice, by prepaid certified U.S. mail, in advance of the date of hearing, of the subject of the hearing, and of the date, time, and place of the hearing. This notice is complete upon mailing. The planning commission shall thereafter hold the said hearing at the time and place set forth in said notice. The permittee may, at said hearing, present evidence on his own behalf and may cross-examine witnesses. After the planning commission has concluded the said hearing, the planning commission shall make written findings of fact from the evidence presented to it at said hearing supporting the conclusion that the permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of the variance (in cases where the said variance is revoked) or that the permittee has not failed to comply with the conditions of the variance (in cases where the said variance is not revoked). These findings shall be embodied in a formal written resolution of the planning commission. In all revocation proceedings the burden of proof is upon the planning commission.
(10) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment. All appeals to the board of adjustment shall follow, to the extent applicable, the procedure as set forth in KGBC 18.90.070.


18.90.040 Conditional use permits.

(a) Purpose. A conditional use permit, issued hereunder, is a device which gives flexibility to the zoning ordinance in a uniform and controlled manner. It permits inclusion, in zones where it is permitted by the zoning ordinance, of uses which are generally desirable to the community, but where the nature of the use will not permit its location at every location in the said zones because of the special problems which the use presents.
(b) Abbreviated Conditional Use Permits.
(1) Purpose. An abbreviated conditional use permit is a device which permits uses that are generally desirable to the community, but the approval thereof could benefit from public comment.
(2) Applicability. Abbreviated conditional use permits are granted for uses that are specifically identified to be processed under the provisions of this section.
(3) Approval Authority. Abbreviated conditional use permits are granted, or referred to the planning commission for a public hearing, by the zoning official.
(4) Application. To be considered complete, an application for an abbreviated conditional use permit must meet the standards below.
a. Contain a completed application for conditional use permit form provided by the planning department; and
b. Contain a completed application for a zoning permit as contained in KGBC 18.90.020; and
c. Contain any other information, documents, or drawings the zoning official deems necessary to evaluate the request for conformance with the standards contained in subsection (c)(6) of this section.
(5) Upon request of the applicant, an abbreviated conditional use permit application may be processed under the procedure for conditional use permits.
(6) Fees. Application fees for abbreviated conditional use permits shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(7) Upon receipt of an application for an abbreviated conditional use permit, the zoning official shall examine said application and, within 10 days of receipt, notify the applicant of the deficiencies found in the application, or schedule the application for public notice.
(8) The zoning official shall render a decision within 30 days of the filing of a complete application for an abbreviated conditional use permit. As express conditions precedent to the granting of any conditional use permit the zoning official must determine in writing that:
a. The requested conditional use is expressly permitted as an abbreviated conditional use permit; and
b. The public notice did not result in a request to remand the request to the planning commission in a timely manner.
(9) Within 10 days of the decision written notice of the request shall be made in accordance with the standards set forth in KGBC 18.90.060(b). The notice shall contain a general description of the request, the location of the property affected, and the method by which a decision by the full planning commission can be requested.
(10) Upon written request by the applicant or any other person notified in subsection (b)(8) of this section within 15 days of distribution of the notice of request, the request shall be referred to the planning commission for processing in the same manner as a conditional use permit request in accordance with subsection (c) of this section.
(11) Unless a request to refer the matter to the planning commission for formal consideration is filed with the zoning official within 15 days of the date of notice distribution, the decision becomes final.
(12) An abbreviated conditional use permit granted by the zoning official shall be conditional upon the privilege granted being utilized within six months after the effective date of the abbreviated conditional use permit.
(13) Revocation and Cancellation of Permit. Any abbreviated conditional use permit granted under this chapter may be revoked and canceled by the planning commission for failure to comply with the conditions of the abbreviated conditional use permit. Before taking any action toward revoking such permit, however, the planning commission shall first give the owner of the property upon which the use is authorized 20 days’ written notice, by prepaid certified U.S. mail, in advance of the date of hearing, of the subject of the hearing, and of the date, time, and place of the hearing. This notice is complete upon mailing. The planning commission shall thereafter hold the said hearing at the time and place set forth in said notice. The permittee may, at said hearing, present evidence on his own behalf and may cross-examine witnesses. After the planning commission has concluded the said hearing, the planning commission shall make written findings of fact from the evidence presented to it at said hearing supporting the conclusion that the permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit (in cases where the said permit is revoked) or that the permittee has not failed to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit (in cases where the said permit is not revoked). These findings shall be embodied in a formal written resolution of the planning commission and shall be retained permanently by the planning commission as part of its official records. In all revocation proceedings the burden of proof is upon the planning commission.
a. After said abbreviated conditional use permit has been revoked, the permittee shall thereafter immediately discontinue the use of the said property for which the said permit had originally been granted. If, after an abbreviated conditional use permit has been revoked, the permittee does not immediately discontinue the use of said property for which the said permit had originally been granted, he is guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, is subject to a fine as established in KGBC Title 2. Each 30-day period that such violation continues shall be deemed a new and separate violation. In addition, the planning commission may apply to the superior court for an injunction to restrain the former permittee from using said land for the purposes previously authorized in said permit.
b. In the event, however, that the permittee duly appeals the revocation of said permit to the board of adjustment, such appeal stays enforcement proceedings unless the board or a court issues an enforcement order based on a certificate of imminent peril to life or property made by the planning commission.
(14) Appeals to the Planning Commission. Decisions by the zoning official on the grant or appeal of an abbreviated conditional use permit may be appealed to the planning commission according to the procedures set out in KGBC 18.90.070.
(c) Conditional Use Permits.
(1) Applicability. Except as specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, all requests for a conditional use permit are processed under the provisions of this subsection.
a. Requests that are specifically specified for processing as abbreviated conditional use permits; or
b. Requests to modify an existing conditional use permit.
(2) Application. To be considered complete an application for a conditional use permit must meet the standards below.
a. Contain a completed application for conditional use permit form provided by the planning department; and
b. A complete zoning permit application as contained in KGBC 18.90.020; and
c. Contain any other information, documents, or drawings the zoning official deems necessary to evaluate the request for conformance with the standards contained in subsection (c)(6)(e) of this section; and
d. Contain any application requirements contained in KGBC 18.50.030.
(3) Fees. Application fees for conditional use permits shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(4) Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit, the zoning official shall examine said application and, within 15 days of receipt, notify the applicant of either the deficiencies found in the application, or the date of the meeting at which the request will be heard by the planning commission.
(5) Approval Authorization. Conditional use permits are granted or denied by the planning commission at a public hearing.
(6) Procedure.
a. Hearing Scheduled. When the zoning official has determined that the said application meets the requirements of this chapter, they shall forward the completed application to the planning commission for its determination within 60 days of determining the application to be complete, unless such time limit is extended by written consent by the applicant.
b. Public notice shall be as provided in KGBC 18.90.060.
c. From the time of filing such application until the time of such hearing, the application, together with all plans and data submitted, shall be available for public inspection in the office of the zoning official.
d. After the zoning official has duly forwarded the completed application to the planning commission, the planning commission shall study it and shall, within 30 days after the receipt of said application, hold a public hearing whereat it:
1. Shall hear and consider evidence and facts from any person at the public hearing or written communication from any person relative to the matter; and
2. May receive evidence pertinent to the granting or denial of said application according to the standards set forth in subsection (c)(6)(e) of this section.
e. Applicable Criteria. As express conditions precedent to the granting of any conditional use permit, a majority of the planning commission members (not merely a majority of the members present), after a public hearing, must find in writing that:
1. The requested conditional use is reasonably necessary for the public health, safety, and general welfare; and
2. The requested conditional use will not permanently or substantially injure the lawful use of neighboring properties; and
3. The requested conditional use will generally be in harmony with the comprehensive plan; and
4. The requested conditional use is expressly permitted by the zoning ordinance in the zone in which the conditional use permit is requested; and
5. The requested conditional use meets any specific criteria contained in KGBC 18.50.030.
f. If, at the said hearing, the planning commission determines that it needs additional information, it may recess said hearing for a period of not more than 30 days, during which time it shall procure or receive such additional information; provided, however, that before it so recesses, it must then and there announce the time and place at which the hearing will be resumed.
g. Within 30 days after the completion of the said hearing, the planning commission shall, from the evidence presented to it, make written findings of fact in a formal resolution of the planning commission, which findings of fact support the standards set forth in subsection (c)(6)(e) of this section (in the case where a conditional use permit is granted) or which findings of fact show that the said evidence does not support the said standards (in the case where a conditional use permit is not granted).
h. Unless otherwise specified by the planning commission as a condition of approval, any conditional use permit approved by the planning commission shall be conditional upon the privilege granted being utilized within 12 months after the effective date of the conditional use permit.
(7) Restrictions and Conditions. In granting a conditional use permit, the planning commission may, in order to ensure compliance with the foregoing standards:
a. Require and attach to the conditional use permit conditions which are more restrictive and in excess of the development standards for the zone in which the conditional use is proposed;
b. Require and attach to the conditional use permit time limits for some or all conditions of the conditional use permit;
c. Require and attach to the conditional use permit conditions which include development requirements in excess of those elsewhere required, landscaping, adequate and lawful water and sewage facilities, adequate and lawful parking, adequate and lawful curb cuts and traffic movement, and any other conditions which will uphold the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance, the comprehensive plan, and the harmony and beneficial use of neighboring properties. The planning commission may also require an agreement and performance bond to ensure compliance with said restrictions and conditions.
(8) Relief From Use-Specific Conditional Use Standards. The planning commission may decrease or waive use-specific conditional use standards, permanently or on a temporary basis. The planning commission must find that the waiver or reduction in standards would not adversely impact surrounding properties.
(9) Revocation and Cancellation of Permit. Any conditional use permit granted under this chapter may be revoked and canceled by the planning commission for failure to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit. Before taking any action toward revoking such permit, however, the planning commission shall first give the owner of the property upon which the conditional use is authorized 20 days’ written notice, by prepaid certified U.S. mail, in advance of the date of hearing, of the subject of the hearing, and of the date, time, and place of the hearing. This notice is complete upon mailing. The planning commission shall thereafter hold the said hearing at the time and place set forth in said notice. The permittee may, at said hearing, present evidence on his own behalf and may cross-examine witnesses. After the planning commission has concluded the said hearing, the planning commission shall make written findings of fact from the evidence presented to it at said hearing supporting the conclusion that the permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit (in cases where the said permit is revoked) or that the permittee has not failed to comply with the conditions of the conditional use permit (in cases where the said permit is not revoked). These findings shall be embodied in a formal written resolution of the planning commission and shall be retained permanently by the planning commission as part of its official records. In all revocation proceedings the burden of proof is upon the planning commission.
a. After said conditional use permit has been revoked, the permittee shall thereafter immediately discontinue the use of the said property for which the said permit had originally been granted. If, after a conditional use permit has been revoked, the permittee does not immediately discontinue the use of said property for which the said permit had originally been granted, he is guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, is subject to a fine of not more than $500.00. Each 30-day period that such violation continues shall be deemed a new and separate violation. In addition, the planning commission may apply to the superior court for an injunction to restrain the former permittee from using said land for the purposes previously authorized in said permit.
b. In the event, however, that the permittee duly appeals the revocation of said permit to the board of adjustment, such appeal stays enforcement proceedings unless the board or a court issues an enforcement order based on a certificate of imminent peril to life or property made by the planning commission.
(10) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment. Decisions by the planning commission on the grant or denial of a conditional use permit are subject to appeal to the board of adjustment under the procedures of KGBC 18.90.070.
(d) Conditional Use Permit Modifications.
(1) Intent. Over time, the circumstances under which a conditional use permit was originally granted can change in such a way as to lessen or obviate the value of the permit. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mechanism by which a quantifiable standard upon which a conditional use permit, granted by the planning commission, may, at the request of the holder of said permit, be modified. It is not the purpose of this chapter to allow a request to modify a conditional use permit granted by the planning commission that has been submitted by any other person or agency to be considered. To allow such modifications would engender distrust in the conditional use permit process and nullify the benefits they impart. Existing conditional use permits granted by the planning commission may only be requested for modification by a third party under the provisions of KGBC 18.90.020(d).
(2) Application.
a. To be considered complete an application to modify a conditional use permit must meet the standards below.
1. Contain a completed application for conditional use permit modification form provided by the planning department; and
2. Contain the original conditional use permit application; and
3. Contain a site plan that clearly shows any modifications that are desired; and
4. A complete zoning permit application as contained in KGBC 18.90.020; and
5. Contain any other information, documents, or drawings the zoning official deems necessary to evaluate the request.
(3) Fees. Application fees for conditional use permit modifications shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(4) Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit modification, the zoning official shall examine said application and, within 10 days of receipt, notify the applicant of the deficiencies found in the application, or schedule the application for public notice.
(5) Approval Authority. Modifications to conditional use permits are granted or referred to the planning commission by the zoning official.
(6) The zoning official shall render a decision within 30 days of the filing of a complete application for an abbreviated conditional use permit. As express conditions precedent to the granting of any conditional use permit the zoning official must determine in writing that:
a. The requested modification changes a quantifiable standard under which the original conditional use permit was granted by 10 percent or less; and
b. The requested modification will not create a violation of any development standard contained in the underlying zoning; and
c. The public notice did not result in a request to remand the request to the planning commission in a timely manner.
(7) Within 10 days of the decision, written notice of the request shall be made in accordance with the standards set forth in KGBC 18.90.060(b). The notice shall contain a general description of the request, the location of the property affected, and the method by which a decision by the full planning commission can be requested.
(8) Unless a request to refer the matter to the planning commission for formal consideration is filed with the zoning official within 15 days of the date of notice distribution, the decision becomes final.
(9) Appeals to the Planning Commission. Decisions by the zoning official on the grant or denial of a modification to a conditional use permit are subject to appeal to the planning commission under the procedures of KGBC 18.90.070.
(e) Duration. Except as otherwise provided for in this title, or as a condition placed by the planning commission, conditional use permits expire if the use for which they are granted ceases for a period of 12 consecutive months, or 18 months in any 36-month period.


18.90.050 Rezones, code amendments, overlays, and planned unit developments.

Whenever the public necessity, convenience or general welfare requires, the borough may, under the following procedure and by ordinance, amend, supplement or change this chapter or the official zoning map, or create a new overlay district or planned unit development.
(a) Authority. Rezones, code amendments, overlay zones, and planned unit developments are established by ordinance of the assembly with recommendation from the planning commission.
(b) Application for Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezones).
(1) A rezone or overlay may be initiated by:
a. The borough assembly on its own motion;
b. The planning commission on its own motion;
c. Any department or agency of a city or the borough;
d. Any individual, corporation or agency, other than those listed above, subject to the following conditions:
1. For a rezone: A petition signed by the owners of not less than 50 percent of the area of property proposed for rezoning as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or such other verification of ownership acceptable to the designated planning official.
2. For an overlay: A petition signed by the owners of not less than 67 percent of the area of property proposed for an overlay as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or such other verification of ownership acceptable to the designated planning official.
i. In addition to the necessary signatures, the petition shall contain:
A. A legibly written legal description of the property involved and the legal document reference for that description. If the legal description is a metes and bounds description written from a survey or subdivision map, then that map showing the proposed rezone shall accompany the legal description of the property involved; and
B. Reasons for the proposed change and any statements or other documents to address the review criteria contained in subsection (b)(4) of this section; and
C. Application fees for zoning amendments shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(2) Any request or petition to amend the official zoning map shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission through the zoning official.
(3) Planning Commission – Public Hearing, Notification and Publication. Before making any recommendation on a proposed amendment to the official zoning map and within 45 days of the initiation thereof, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. Public notice shall generally describe the proposed rezone and be published according to the procedures found in KGBC 18.90.060.
(4) The planning commission shall study any request or petition for amendment of the official zoning map to determine:
a. The need and justification for any proposed change of the zoning map to:
1. Address an error or uncertainty in the official zoning map; or
2. Adapt to changing conditions over which the owner(s) of the area have limited control; or
3. To implement a change in the comprehensive plan.
b. There is adequate public infrastructure to support the potential development the amendment to the official zoning map will allow, to include:
1. Transportation to support the levels and types of traffic; and
2. Electrical and communications; and
3. Water and sewer; and
4. Demand for public services including fire, police, EMS, and schools.
c. The impact of the rezone or overlay on the character of the surrounding area or neighborhood as indicated by:
1. Traffic routes and volumes; and
2. Density of development; and
3. Building type, size, and height.
d. The amendment to the official zoning map will not cause a need or increased pressure for additional map amendments that will allow development for which there is inadequate infrastructure or will adversely impact surrounding properties.
e. The amendment to the official zoning map will implement or further the purposes of the comprehensive plan.
(5) The planning commission may recommend, and the assembly may make modifications to, any proposed or recommended amendment; provided, that the commission and assembly find that such change would be in the public interest; and provided further, that such modification shall not modify any property not included in the advertised proposal and shall not be less restrictive than the zoning applied for.
(6) Within seven days after the planning commission has acted on a proposed amendment of the zoning map in accordance with the foregoing provisions, a report and recommendation shall be submitted to the borough clerk. Such recommendation of the planning commission shall be advisory only, and shall not be binding on the assembly.
(7) Before the planning commission recommendation for amendment to the zoning map is presented to the assembly, the borough clerk shall cause an ordinance to be prepared setting forth the details of the proposed amendment. Such ordinance shall be subject to two public hearings; the first public hearing shall be scheduled at the meeting at which it is proposed to be introduced, and if it is introduced, the second public hearing shall be held prior to adoption. Such ordinance shall be available for introduction at a regular meeting of the assembly within 45 days of receipt of the transmittal by the borough clerk. Notification and publication of the proposed introduction of the ordinance shall be as set forth in subsection (c)(4) of this section.
(8) An ordinance resulting in a change in the official zoning map shall identify by legal description the property rezoned. All changes to the official zoning map shall be made by the borough manager or designee as required in the ordinance making change in zoning. Such official shall cause the digital zoning map to be updated to reflect the authorized rezone. If the new map is found to be correct, the borough manager or designee, in the presence of the borough clerk or deputy clerk, shall make the following certification on the original ordinance authorizing the rezone:
Certificate
I, ___________________, _____________________________ for the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, hereby certify that on this ______ day of __________, 20__, pursuant to the provisions of KGBC 18.90.050, I have caused the Official Zoning Map to be changed in the manner and to the extent directed and authorized by Ordinance No. _______, which ordinance rezoned certain property more particularly described in such ordinance from ____________________ to ____________________.
__________________________
(Title)
Subscribed and sworn to before me and witnessed by me, on this__day of____, 20__.
ATTEST:
__________________________
Borough Clerk or Deputy Clerk
The borough clerk, or deputy clerk, shall be present at the time this certificate is signed and shall attest the same.
(9) Any area located in a planned unit development shall be designated according to the provision of subsection (e)(12) of this section.
(c) Amendments to the Text of the Borough’s Zoning Ordinance.
(1) An amendment to the zoning ordinance text may be initiated by:
a. The borough assembly on its own motion;
b. The planning commission on its own motion;
c. Any department or agency of a city or the borough;
d. Any owner of real property within Ketchikan Gateway Borough.
(2) Any request to change the zoning ordinance text shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission through the designated planning official.
(3) Fees. Application fees for applications to modify the text of the zoning ordinance shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(4) Planning Commission – Public Hearing, Notification and Publication. Before making any recommendation on a proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance text and within 45 days of the initiation thereof, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. Public notice shall be given stating the date, time, place and the purpose of the hearing. The notice shall generally describe the proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance and be published according to the procedures found in KGBC 18.90.060.
(5) The planning commission shall study any request or petition for amendment to determine:
a. The need and justification for any proposed change of the zoning ordinance to:
1. Address an identified error;
2. Adapt the code to changing conditions;
3. Implement a change to the comprehensive plan.
b. The impact the ordinance will have on existing development rights.
c. The impact the ordinance will have on land use patterns.
d. The impact the ordinance will have on adjacent lands.
e. The impact the ordinance will have on the equitable distribution of land use rights or the application of the provisions of this title thereon.
f. How the ordinance will implement or further the purposes of the comprehensive plan.
(6) The planning commission may recommend, and the assembly may make modifications to, any proposed or recommended amendment.
(7) Within seven days after the planning commission has acted on a proposed amendment of the zoning ordinance in accordance with the foregoing provisions, a report and recommendation shall be submitted to the borough clerk. Such recommendation of the planning commission shall be advisory only, and shall not be binding on the assembly.
(8) Before the planning commission recommendation for amendment to the zoning ordinance is presented to the assembly, the borough clerk shall cause an ordinance to be prepared setting forth the details of the proposed amendment. Such ordinance shall be subject to two public hearings, the first public hearing shall be scheduled at the meeting at which it is proposed to be introduced, and if it is introduced, the second public hearing shall be held prior to adoption. Such ordinance shall be available for introduction at a regular meeting of the assembly within 45 days of receipt of the transmittal by the borough clerk.
(d) Creation of a New Overlay District.
(1) Overlay zones are established through the change of zoning process, as described in subsection (b) of this section.
(2) In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, an application to create an overlay zone must contain a narrative description detailing:
a. The uses to be allowed as principal, accessory, conditional, or permitted with standards; and
b. Any specific development standards for conditional and permitted with standards; and
c. Such other requirements as may be applicable to the establishment of the particular district.
(3) Fees. Application fees for applications to create an overlay zone shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.
(4) Any overlay zones codified in this title shall be identified on the official zoning map by the letters “OL” followed by the ordinance number establishing the district (e.g., OL 7573).
(5) Implementation.
a. Subdivisions will be completed according to the relevant sections of KGBC Title 17 subject to any specific design criteria established by the overlay.
b. Use permits, including zoning permits and conditional use permits, will be issued according to the relevant sections of this title subject to any specific land use and development requirements established by the overlay.
c. Variances. Relief from the specific development requirements on individual lots within the overlay shall be subject to the requirements of KGBC 18.90.030.
d. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the overlay district, the interpretation will follow the provisions of KGBC 18.30.010.
e. Application of zone regulations will follow the provisions of KGBC 18.30.020.
f. Fees, representation on applications, and other administrative elements of an overlay request are the responsibility of the initiators of the proposed overlay district.
(e) Planned Unit Development Requirements. All requests for a rezone to a planned unit development (PUD) zone must meet the requirements listed below:
(1) Establishment of PUD Zone. PUD zones are established through the change of zoning process, as described in subsection (b) of this section.
(2) Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area for a PUD containing nonresidential uses shall be two acres unless a smaller area is authorized by the grant of a variance according to the procedure set out in KGBC 17.10.040. The minimum site area for a PUD exclusively for residential purposes shall be 10,000 square feet.
(3) Phased Development. Phased developments are permitted in conjunction with a preliminary subdivision plan approval in accordance with KGBC Title 17.
(4) Master Development Plan Requirement. A master development plan shall take the form of a map and narrative description.
a. The map shall be drawn to scale and show the external boundaries of the PUD and the boundaries of any development areas contained within the PUD. Development areas shall be labeled so as to be differentiated in the narrative description.
b. The narrative description shall establish, for the PUD as a whole and for any development areas it contains:
1. The uses to be allowed as principal, accessory, conditional, or permitted with standards; and
2. The development standards that apply to lands contained with the PUD and development areas; and
3. Any specific development standards for conditional and permitted with standards; and
4. Such other requirements as may be applicable to the establishment of the particular district; and
5. Perimeter Requirement. Property adjacent to the perimeter proposed for nonresidential use and adjacent to property outside of the PUD area and within a residential zone shall maintain all specific setback or buffer requirements typically required for such uses when adjacent to property within a residential zone.
(5) Additional Review Criteria. The following review criteria are in addition to the rezone review criteria established in subsection (b)(4) of this section:
a. The design effectively provides for clustered buildings, mixed uses, or mixed housing types; and
b. The development incorporates boundary buffers sufficient to separate adjacent property from dissimilar uses; and
c. The configuration of the development provides for economy and efficiency in utilities, housing construction, streets, parking and circulation; and
d. The PUD must be integrated with surrounding land uses and minimize any negative impacts on them.
(6) Implementation.
a. Subdivisions will be completed according to the relevant sections of KGBC Title 17 subject to any specific design criteria established by the PUD.
b. Use permits, including zoning permits and conditional use permits, will be issued according to the relevant sections of this title subject to any specific land use and development requirements established by the PUD.
(7) Amendment of Master Development Plan or Zone Map.
a. Approval by Assembly. The PUD zone master development plan is approved by the assembly as a zoning amendment approval under subsection (b) of this section. Changes to the master development plan require approval of a zoning amendment in accordance with subsection (b) of this section if such change will result in any of the following:
1. An increase in the number of dwelling units allowed;
2. An increase in the gross building area for commercial or industrial structures;
3. An addition of principal or conditional uses;
4. Changes to the external boundaries of the current PUD.
(8) Approval by Planning Commission. The following minor changes to the master development plan do not require approval of a zoning amendment by the assembly under subsection (b) of this section, but will require approval by the planning commission applying the procedure for major variances in KGBC 18.90.030(c):
a. Changes to the original boundaries of development areas that do not impact the external PUD boundary;
b. A transfer of development rights between development areas (number of residential dwelling units and gross square footage of nonresidential structures);
c. Deletion of land uses; or
d. Changes to the development standards, excluding perimeter buffer or setback requirements.
(9) Approval by Zoning Official. The following minor changes to the master development plan may be approved by the zoning official following the procedures for approval of a minor variance under KGBC 18.90.030(b):
a. Changes to the original boundaries of development areas that do not impact the external PUD boundary and result in a change in area of a land use of less than 10 percent of the overall area of that use;
b. Interpretation of uses to be allowed or prohibited; or
c. Changes to dimensional standards less than 10 percent, excluding perimeter buffer or setback requirements.
(10) Variances. Relief from the specific development requirements on individual lots within the PUD shall be subject to the requirements of KGBC 18.90.030.
(11) Appeals. Any appeals from decisions made under subsection (e)(8) or (e)(9) of this section shall be in accordance with KGBC 18.90.070.
(12) Identification of District on Zoning Map.
a. Any PUD zones shall be identified on the official zoning map by the letters “PUD” followed by the ordinance number establishing the district. Any ordinance amending a PUD district also shall be referenced on the PUD official zoning map by ordinance number (e.g., PUD 262).
b. Amendments to the PUD district approved by the planning commission shall be referenced on the zoning map by commission resolution number. (e.g., PUD (PC 6734)).
c. Amendments to the PUD district approved by the zoning administrator shall be referenced on the zoning map by date (e.g., PUD (DPCD 5/3/83)).


18.90.060 Public notification.

(a) Publication.
(1) Public notice shall be given stating the date, time, place and purpose of hearing. If posted on the internet, the post shall remain until the date and time set for the hearing. The notice shall generally describe the action sought. The notice shall be published at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Such notification is complete upon publication.
(b) Notification.
(1) At least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing the clerk of the planning commission shall mail notice of the requested action to the address listed in the current assessment roll for the owners of property as follows:
a. Within the corporate limits of the city of Ketchikan, Alaska, owners of property located 600 feet from any point on the outside perimeter of the property for which the action has been requested;
b. Outside the corporate limits of the city of Ketchikan, Alaska, owners of property located 1,200 feet from any point on the outside perimeter of the property for which the action has been requested; and
c. The owner of the property for which the action has been requested.
(2) Said notification shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. The information contained in the public notice.
b. A map or other visual aid to assist the recipient in identifying the location of the property for which the action has been requested.
(3) Such notifications are complete upon mailing.
(c) Agency Notification.
(1) The clerk of the planning commission may provide notice of the requested action to the United States of America, the state of Alaska, the city of Ketchikan, the city of Saxman, the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, or any agency or department thereof believed to have jurisdictional authority or responsibility for anything that might be impacted by the requested action.
(2) Said notifications may be sent by mail or electronically, and are complete upon being sent.
(d) From the time of filing such application until the time of such hearing, the application, together with all plans and data submitted, shall be available for public inspection in the office of the zoning official or on the internet.


18.90.070 Appeals.

(a) Appeals to Planning Commission (Administrative Decisions).
(1) Any party with ownership or possessory interest in property located in the borough may file with the planning commission an appeal to a decision made by a borough zoning official in the enforcement, administration or application of a land use regulation adopted under this title. Grounds for granting such appeal shall be limited to the improper application of law by a borough zoning official. All such appeals shall be filed in writing with the zoning official within 10 days of the date of said decision and shall contain all of the following information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the appellant;
b. A statement indicating the appellant’s standing in the matter;
c. A description of the action for which the appeal is sought;
d. A specific and detailed statement of the basis and grounds upon which the appeal is made;
e. A statement of the relief sought; and
f. An appeal fee as established by the assembly by resolution.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete appeal, the zoning official shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the planning commission at a date no more than 60 days after the date it was received.
a. At least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published. If posted on the internet, the post shall remain until the date and time set for the hearing. In addition, at least 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of said public hearing shall be given to the appellant(s) and affected property owners or possessors.
(3) Public Hearing and Determination. After the zoning official has duly forwarded the appeal to the planning commission, the planning commission shall, within 30 days after the receipt of said application, hold a public hearing where it may receive evidence pertinent to the granting or denial of said application. If, at the said hearing, the planning commission determines that it needs additional information, it may recess said hearing for a period of not more than 30 days, during which time it shall receive such additional information; provided, however, that before it so recesses, it must then and there announce the time and place at which the hearing will be resumed. Within 30 days after the completion of the said hearing, the planning commission shall, in a formal written resolution of the commission, either grant or deny the application, and the planning commission shall make its findings of fact a part thereof.
(b) Appeals of Planning Commission Decisions. A municipal officer or any party with ownership or possessory interest in property located within the borough may file with the board of adjustment an appeal of decisions of the planning commission on an administrative decision, or which grant or deny an application for a conditional use permit, variance, or modification to a PUD. All such appeals shall be filed in writing with the clerk of the board of adjustment within 15 days of said decision from which an appeal is sought.
(c) Appeals to the Board of Adjustment.
(1) The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from decisions of the planning commission as specified in subsection (c)(3) of this section.
(2) The board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate, and to that end shall have all the powers of the planning commission.
(3) Procedure of the Board of Adjustment.
a. The assembly is the board of adjustment. Meetings of the borough board are held at the call of the presiding officer. The presiding officer may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. Meetings and hearings of the board shall be open to the public, and the board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing its decision, the reasons for its decision, and the vote of each member upon each question. Said minutes shall be public records.
b. A municipal officer or any party with ownership or possessory interest in property located within the borough may file with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying in detail such person’s objections to the action from which an appeal is sought. All such appeals shall be filed in writing with the borough clerk, who is the clerk of the board of adjustment, on a form provided by the clerk, and shall contain all of the following information:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the appellant;
2. A statement indicating the appellant’s standing in the matter;
3. A description of the action appealed from, including property descriptions;
4. A specific and detailed statement of the basis and grounds upon which the appeal is made;
5. A statement of the relief sought; and
6. An appeal fee as established by the assembly by resolution.
c. Grounds upon which the board of adjustment may grant an appeal are:
1. A procedural error; or
2. An error in the application of the pertinent law; or
3. A lack of evidence to support findings and conclusions; or
4. The misrepresentation of a fact.
d. All appeals shall be filed with the clerk no later than 15 days after the date of the decision; provided, however, if the clerk determines that a notice of appeal filed within such 15-day period is incomplete or lacking in sufficient detail, the clerk shall notify the appellant in writing at the address indicated in the notice on appeal specifying the deficiencies. The appellant shall have an additional 10 days from the date such notice is mailed to correct such deficiencies by filing a supplement to the notice of appeal correcting such deficiencies or adding additional information. Any appeal filed after the time provided above shall not be considered by the board of adjustment.
e. Upon such notice of appeal having been duly filed, the clerk shall thereupon send a certified copy thereof to the zoning administrator, the planning commission secretary and the planning commission, together with a written request for all pertinent records and transcripts, including the written decision and/or resolution of the planning commission granting or denying the said application. The zoning administrator and planning commission secretary shall, within seven days after having received said certified copy of the appeal and request, certify and deliver said records, transcripts and documents to the clerk of the board of adjustment.
f. An appeal to the board stays enforcement proceedings unless the board or a court issues an enforcement order based on a certificate of imminent peril to life or property made by the enforcement officer.
g. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals on the record established by the planning commission considering all pertinent records, transcripts, documents, testimony or other evidence certified to it by the zoning administrator and the planning commission secretary. The board of adjustment shall consider at a public meeting all appeals not later than 30 days following the date the certified record specified in subsection (c)(3)(e) of this section is delivered to the clerk of the board of adjustment; provided, however, the date for the public meeting may be continued for a period not to exceed an aggregate total of 30 additional days as follows:
1. By the clerk upon the clerk’s determination there is a lack of a quorum, or upon receipt by the clerk of a written request from the appellant not less than three days prior to the scheduled meeting; or
2. By the board for purposes of securing additional information, or upon written request for a continuance by the appellant, or for other reasons.
h. At least 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the public meeting shall be published. If posted on the internet, the post shall remain until the date and time set for the hearing. In addition, at least 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of said public meeting shall be given to the appellant(s) and affected property owners or possessors, as such is determined within this title.
i. The board of adjustment, after having received and considered the said appeal, the certified records, transcripts and documents, at a duly held appeal hearing, shall forthwith render a decision as set forth in subsection (c)(3)(j) of this section. The board of adjustment may provide an opportunity to hear a limited summary of the appeal and may question the appellant, the property owner and the planning commission’s representative about the appeal; however, evidence not previously before the planning commission will not be heard or made a part of the board of adjustment record. The decisions of the board of adjustment shall be by motion and the vote shall be taken by roll call. A majority vote in the affirmative by the members present at a hearing in which a quorum is present adopts any motion. Following adoption of the motion, the members voting on the prevailing side of the motion shall, with the presiding officer, develop formal specific findings of fact which support the decision and which shall be deemed part of the final decision and permanently entered in the record of the appeal proceedings.
j. The adoption of the motion constitutes the final decision of the board of adjustment, and the date of the adoption of the motion constitutes the date of the final decision of the board of adjustment. The clerk of the board of adjustment shall, not later than 10 days of the date of the final decision, certify said motion to the zoning administrator, planning commission secretary and planning commission. In addition, a certified copy of the motion shall immediately be mailed to the appellant(s) by certified mail, return receipt requested. The appellant shall be informed of his further right of appeal as set forth in subsection (c)(4) of this section.
k. If the board of adjustment fails, within 30 days after the date on which the hearing of the appeal is closed, to affirmatively reverse, affirm, modify or remand the decision of the planning commission, the decision of the zoning official or planning commission shall be deemed to be upheld and affirmed.
l. A decision, once made, may not subsequently be reconsidered, amended or rescinded by the board, any parliamentary rules or ordinances to the contrary notwithstanding.
(4) Judicial Review. The owner of the property, a municipal officer or any party with ownership or possessory interest in property located within the borough may appeal an action of the board of adjustment to the superior court in the manner provided by Rule 602 of the Rules of Appellate Procedure of the State of Alaska.


18.90.080 Enforcement.

(a) Complaints Regarding Violations. Whenever a violation occurs, any person may file a complaint in regard thereto. All such complaints shall be brought to the attention of the zoning official, who shall record such complaint and immediately investigate and report thereon to the borough manager. If the zoning official finds that any of the provisions of this title are being violated, notification in writing shall be provided to the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The zoning official shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings or structures; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this title to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions, consistent with KGBC 18.30.030 on nonconforming lots, structures, etc.
(b) Penalties for Violations. For any and every violation of the provisions of this title, the owner, agent or contractor of a building or premises where such violations have been committed or shall exist, or any other person who maintains any building or premises in which any violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a violation and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each and every day that such violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Any building or structure set up, erected, built, moved or maintained or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this title shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the borough manager shall immediately commence action for the removal thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to remove such building, structure or use. All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.


18.90.090 Fees.

Application fees for applications, petitions, and requests that are processed under the requirements and authorizations provided by this chapter shall be as provided for in KGBC 2.105.030.